# Copyright (C) 2001-2011, Parrot Foundation.

=head1 Name

parrotbug.pod - Parrot bug report

=head1 Description

A program to help generate bug reports about parrot, and mail them.
It is designed to be used interactively. Normally no arguments will
be needed.

=head1 Usage

parrotbug [option] [action]

=head2 Comman line Options

To report successful build on this system to parrot developers use :

    --ok

Only use  C<--ok>   if everything was ok.If there were any problems at all, use :

    --nok

It is used to Report unsuccessful build on system.

To include specific summary with the message use :

    --summary <summary>

To include specific category to the bug report use :

    --category <category>

To include severity to the bug report use :

    --severity <severity>

To set your emal addres use :

    --from <address>

To open editor to use for editing the bug report use :

    --editor <editor>

Not to send a bug report which receive acknowledgement use :
   
    --ack
    --noack

To open a file containing the body of the report use :

    --input-file

Use this to quickly send a prepared message.

To view file where parrotbug will save it's bug report use :

    --output-file

Note: you will be prompted if the program miss some information.

=head2 Command line Actions

To dump message use :

    --dump

To save message use :

    --save

To print help message and exit after that use :

    --help

To print version information and exit after that use :

    --version

=head1 Help

For more help or any other question you go to L<http://parrot.org> or
L<http://github.com/parrot/parrot>.Or you can send email to 'parrot-dev@parrot.org'.
You are also invited to join the #parrot IRC channel on irc.parrot.org.

=cut





