# Copyright (C) 2011, Parrot Foundation.

=pod

=head1 NAME

docs/binaries/README.pod - Readme file on how to write a POD for the various installable binaries within the Parrot distribution. 

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This README offers only some minimal guidance on how to write POD files for the various installable binaries in Parrot.  Because, to date, we have not developed any specific guidelines or instructions on how best to accomplish this, we offer the below, rather general, suggestions:

=over 4

=item * Read all of the available, relevant documentation in the 'docs' directory regarding the executable.

=item * Review the source, the comments, and any POD embedded within the source code of the executable I<See, e.g.,> the source and the POD in F<frontend/parrot/main.c>.

=over 8

Note: In cetain instances, there is a good deal of documentation within the executable's directory.  I<See, e.g.,> 'compilers/opsc'.

=back

=item * Execute the binary with the '--help' option. Then, along with any general or specific statements you can form about the executable from the above sources, use the output written to STDOUT as an aid in writing the POD file. I<See, e.g.,> './parrot --help' and the attendant POD in 'docs/binaries/parrot.pod'.

=item * Be sure to store the POD file in the 'docs/binaries' directory.

=back

=head2 List of Binaries

Below is a list of binaries in the 'docs/binaries' which need POD files:

=over 4

=item * ops2c

=item * parrotbug

=item * parrot_config

=item * parrot_nci_thunk_gen

=item * parrot-nqp

=item * parrot-prove

=item * pbc_to_exe

=item * winxed

=item * plumage

=back

=head2 Example

For an example of how to write a POD file for an executable, I<see> F<docs/binaries/parrot.pod>.

=head2 How to Get Help

Read the I<Parrot Developer FAQ> in F<docs/gettingstarted.pod>.  It contains all of the information you need to get started helping out on Parrot.  Just follow the instructions on locating and subscribing to the Developer Mailing List. Or, alternatively (or in addition to), follow the instructions on how to visit the C<#parrot> channel on the IRC server C<irc.parrot.org>.  Either way, you will find someone ready to point you in the right direction.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2011, Parrot Foundation.

=cut
