=head1 NAME

Software Transactional Memory internals

=head1 VERSION

$Revision$

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The STM implementation is based on Ennals' paper, see
L<http://www.cambridge.intel-research.net/~rennals/052_Rob_Ennals.pdf>.
Most of the internals of the STM implementation are contained in
C<src/stm/backend.c> and C<src/stm/stm_internals.h>

=head2 Shared PMCs

Before any transaction is committed, the STM system calls the
VTABLE method C<share_ro()> on the PMC to make it safe to share.
This VTABLE method should make the PMC read-only and mark it as
sharable. Doing this typically requires substantailly less effort
(and less synchoronization) than making it safe to share a writable
PMC. Implementations of this VTABLE method currently exist in the
scalar, array, ParrotObject, STMVar, and STMRef PMC types. 
C<share_ro()> returns a potentially different PMC that is the shared
and read-only version.
(The PMC is allowed to be relocated for a potentially different future 
implementation, but the current implementation actually always returns
the pmc it is called on.)

Note that C<share_ro()> needs to share everything to which the PMC refers.
PMCs not marked as shared may not be garbage collected correctly (i.e.
freed when references to them still exist) if they are not always referenced
through their 'owning' interpreter.

To support this feature, pmc2c generates a second vtable for most types
with the writing methods removed. (Generation of this second vtable
can be disabled with the C<no_ro> PMC flag.) A pointer to this vtable
is stored in the C<ro_variant_vtable> entry of the VTABLE structure.
One can switch to this vtable by calling C<setprop()> to set the 
"_ro" property to a true value. The implementation of C<setprop()>
in C<default.pmc> performs the switch.

Methods which are considered read-only point to automatically generated
versions that call C<internal_exception()> in the read-only vtable.
The notion of read-onlyness is obtained first from C<vtable.tbl>'s
marking of methods with C<:write>. For MMD methods, it is guessed when
a method will write a value based on the signature of the method,
and if it would, then the check 
C<<(pmc->vtable->flags & VTABLE_IS_READONLY_FLAG)>> is performed to see
if the object is unsafe to write. (This is implemented by calls to
C<mmd_ensure_writable> in C<mmd.c>.) For other methods, C<find_method>
is overriden in the read-only variant to check the "write" property
on the method that would be returned. (See also C<Parrot_mark_method_writes>
in C<inter_misc.c>.) If it is set, then C<PMCNULL> is returned, 
making the method lookup fail. 

C<.pmc> files may mark vtable and NCI methods with the annotations
C<:read> and C<:write> to override the default notion of whether or
not they read and write. These values should be inherited properly.
See C<src/dynpmc/rotest.pmc> for an example.

C<share_ro()> implementations should also call C<pt_shared_fixup()>.
Currently, C<pt_shared_fixup()> changes the vtable pointer to the equivalent
one in the first interpreter, hopefully ensuring the vtable pointer will
remain valid if the current interpreter exits. It also marks the PMC
as shared so garbage collection will work properly on it. The PMC
C<pt_shared_fixup()> returns is the one implementations of C<share_ro()>
returns. Currently, this is the same PMC that is passed in.

When a user of STM requests a writable copy of a PMC stored in an PMC handle
a clone is made. C<local_pmc_copy> in C<src/stm/backend.c> performs
the cloning using C<VTABLE_clone()> on some types where it is safe
and C<Parrot_clone()> otherwise. (C<Parrot_clone()> is much slower
than C<VTABLE_clone()> in most cases, but it not always a deep clone,
or in the special case of Strings, safe to do from an interpreter other
than the one in which the object was created.)

Note that the PMC referred to by a PMC handle may still contain C<STMVar>s
and C<STMRef>s, which should be preserved by C<local_pmc_copy()>; that is
they will still refer to the same PMC handle. This allows
structures like linked lists (where each node contains the value, and
STMVars acting as next and previous pointers) and is safe because
C<STMVar>s and C<STMRef>s are immutable in the sense that they cannot be
made to point to a different PMC handle.

=head2 PMC Handles

STM wraps each PMC it manages with a 'PMC handle', which is a garbage-
collectable structure. C<STMVar> and C<STMRef> PMCs contain a pointer
to the PMC handle in their C<struct_val> field. A PMC handle's fields
are as follows:

     Parrot_atomic_pointer owner_or_version;

If this pointer contains an odd memory address, it is a version number.
If it contains an even memory address, it points to the transaction
log of the current owner. Ownership of a PMC handle is only obtained
when a write is planned and block other reads and writes so long as the
owner is not aborted.

(Note that, as this implies, the STM implementation assumes its
subtransaction logs are aligned on a 2-byte boundary, at least.)

     void * volatile last_version;

This contains the last version number that was committed to this
handle. It is always updated before C<owner_or_version> is.

     PMC *value;

This contains the current value of the wrapped PMC. This value
should only be used after reading a version number (not owner
address from C<owner_or_version>). This value may only be changed
after setting C<owner_or_version> to point to a transaction log
and marking the transaction as committed.
  
     STM_waitlist change_waitlist;

This waitlist is signalled after writes are made and threads will
add themselves to it after C<Parrot_STM_wait()> is called.

=head2 Transaction Logs

Transaction logs contain a list of values read and written by a thread.
Currently, these lists are kept in (dynamically allocated) arrays.
To support nested transactions, each level of nesting has its own small
structure:

 struct STM_tx_log sub {
     Parrot_atomic_integer status;

One of STM_STATUS_ACTIVE, STM_STATUS_ABORTED, or STM_STATUS_COMMITTED.
An active transaction is one that may potentially commit. An aborted
transaction is one that may never commit. A committed transaction has
committed or is in the process of committing and can no longer be aborted.

     Parrot_atomic_integer wait_length;

Used for simple deadlock detection.

     int first_write;
     int first_read;

The first read and first write record of this transaction. Note that these
will be set even if the transaction has no reads or writes. The innermost
transaction owns the write records between first_write and last_write
(in C<struct STM_tx_log>) inclusive.

 };

The threads' entire transaction log is represented by a 
C<struct STM_tx_log> structure:

 struct STM_tx_log {
     int depth;

How many transactions are active in this thread. C<0> when no transaction
is opened.

     STM_tx_log_sub inner[STM_MAX_TX_DEPTH];

Logs for individual nested transactions. 0 is the first used. 
C<STM_MAX_TX_DEPTH> is the maximum transaction nesting depth, which is 
currently 32.

     int last_write;
     int last_read;

The last read and write record in use. (-1 when no read or write records
are in use.)

     STM_write_record *writes;
     int writes_alloced;
     STM_read_record *reads;
     int reads_alloced;

Point to the actual read and write records. There should only be one
read record active for any PMC handle. There may be multiple write
records for a PMC handle because an inner transaction must create a new
write record even if the outer transaction has one to support aborts.
If there are multiple write records for a single PMC handle, only the
last should be used. If there is both a write and read record,
the value derived from the write record should be used.

Note that a lot of linear searching through these record lists needs 
to be done, so it would probably better if some other data structure
were used, though there is likely to be little performance difference
(or worse performance) when transactions are small.

     struct waitlist_thread_data *waitlist_data;

Used internally by the waitlist implementation in C<src/stm/waitlist.[ch]>

  };

To support saving and replaying logs through the STMLog PMC, a structure
that merely holds read and write records and no status information exists.
Note that because version numbers in this saved log are out-of-date, a
replayed transaction is unlikely to commit.
 
 struct STM_saved_tx_log {
     int num_reads;
     int num_writes;
     STM_read_record *reads;
     STM_write_record *writes;
 };

=head3 Read and write records

Read and write record structures are currently identical and
have the following fields:

 Parrot_STM_PMC_handle handle;

The handle to which this record refers.

 void *saw_version;

If we got the C<value> from an outer transaction's write record,
then this may be the address of the the outer transaction's log.
Otherwise: in read records, it is the value of C<owner_or_version> 
just before we read C<value> from the PMC handle, and, in write records, 
it is the value of C<owner_or_version> before we used
C<PARROT_ATOMIC_PTR_CAS> to change it to point to our transaction log.

 PMC *value;

The value seen by the user of the transaction. For read records,
this is taken directly from the PMC handle; for write records, it
is whatever value we intend to write (but before we called
C<VTABLE_share_ro()> on it).

=head2 wait_for_version

One of the most hackish routines in C<src/stm/backend.c> is 
C<wait_for_version> which waits for a PMC handle's C<owner_or_version>
field to become a version number. When C<owner_or_version> does not have
a version number, that essentially means that the transaction it points to
has an exclusive lock on the value. It does this with a busy wait, under
the assumption that the thread it is waiting on will complete soon. For the
sake of systems with few processors, it also calls C<YIELD> each
iteration after 10 loops to give other programs a change to run.
While waiting it does a number of other things:

=over 4

=item *

Deadlock detection. Deadlocks are detected by having each thread
keep a counter that is initially 0. Each time a thread waits, it reads
this number from the transaction on which it is waiting, and if that
number is less than or equal to its number, it changes its number to
be one larger than the other. When a deadlock exists, these numbers
will increase without bound. When C<wait_for_version> sees its number
increase beyond the number of active threads, it aborts the competing
transaction (using C<PARROT_ATOMIC_INT_CAS> to ensure the transaction 
was previously active because it is not safe to aborted a 'committed' 
transaction.)

=item *

Lock revokation. If a competing transaction marked as aborted but hasn't 
set C<owner_for_version> to the old version number, C<wait_for_version>
can do it for them using the C<last_version> field of the PMC handle.

=item *

Interrupts for garbage collection. C<wait_for_version> checks a flag that
indicates the current thread has an event queued to stop it for garbage
collection. If so, it runs C<pt_suspend_self_for_gc()> to assure that
the garbage collection run occurs in a timely manner.

=item *

Detects if the current transaction is aborted. If the current
transaction or any of its outer transactions are marked as aborted,
C<wait_for_version> returns a bogus version number.

=item *

Aborts the current transaction if it waits an exceptionally long time.

=back

=head2 Creating read records

Values are read from PMC handles as follows:

First, the current transaction log is searched for an existing
write or read record for the PMC handle in question. If one exists,
the value stored in the record is returned.

Otherwise a new read record is created, then the version number is read,
then the value is read, then the version number is read again. This
is retried until the version number read in both cases is the same.

=head2 Creating write records

The function C<find_write_record()> performs all the work involved in
creating new write records. It first searches for an old write record
in the innermost transaction. If there is one, it returns it. Otherwise,
it searches for an outer write record or read record that refers
to the value. If one is found, then the version number from 
that record is used. For write records this 'version number' is actually
the address of the C<STM_tx_log_sub> structure for the outer transaction.
If no version number can be derived from the transaction log,
C<wait_for_version()> is called to get
and potentially wait for the version number of the PMC handle. 
After finding the version number C<PARROT_ATOMIC_PTR_CAS> is used to
set the C<owner_or_version> field of the PMC handle to the current
transaction. A new write record is then populated with the
seen version and possibly a copy of the previously seen value.
If the C<PARROT_ATOMIC_PTR_CAS> fails and the version number
came from C<wait_for_version()>, 
C<find_write_record()> retries the C<wait_for_version()> and C<CAS> 
until it suceeds or the transaction (or its outer transactions)
are aborted.
If the C<CAS> fails using a version number from the transaction log,
the current transaction is marked as aborted.

When C<find_write_record()> aborts the transaction or detects that it
(or its outer transactions) are aborted, it will still create a write
record if an appropriate one did not already exist.
To prevent code from failing too spectacularly,
if a copy of the old value is desired C<find_write_record()> uses
the value pointed to by the PMC handle. Note that in these cases
C<find_write_record()> may create a write record with a bogus
C<saw_version> field, which should be fine since the transaction will never
commit anyways.

=head2 Aborting transactions

To abort a transaction, first C<PARROT_ATOMIC_INT_SET> is used to change
the transaction's status field to C<STM_STATUS_ABORTED>. Then,
C<PARROT_ATOMIC_PTR_CAS> is used to change the 
C<owner_or_version> field of all PMC handles listed in the write records
to the old version if the current transaction still owned them.
(This work is done in the function C<do_partial_abort>.)

Then (except on 'partial aborts' as occurs to outer transactions
before C<STM_wait>) the current transaction depth is changed and the old
read and write records silently discarded.

=head2 Committing transactions

To commit the outermost transaction, first C<PARROT_ATOMIC_INT_CAS>
is used to change the status of the transaction from ACTIVE to
COMMITTED. (If this fails, the commit fails and the only explanation is
that the transaction was aborted by some other thread.) A transaction
logically occurs at the point when its status changes to COMMITTED
if it commits at all. (The
values may actually be written later, but any reads of them from
this point on will see the new values.) 
First, the transactions
read records are checked against the PMC handles. If the version numbers
do not match, the commit fails and the transaction is marked as aborted.
(Since the version number was the same when the value was read initially
and now, they must have been that when the transaction logically occured.)
Otherwise, for each write record a new version number is created from the
previous one. The PMC handle's C<last_version> is set to this. The
C<value> field is set to the result of C<VTABLE_share_ro()> for the PMC
in the write record. Then the C<owner_or_version> field is changed from
a pointer to our transaction log to the new version number.
(These tasks are done in the function C<do_real_commit>.)

=head2 Merging transactions

To 'commit' inner transactions, they are merged with their outer transaction.
(This is done in the function C<merge_transactions>.) Currently,
merges always succeed -- even if the inner transaction is aborted.
It is necessary to either have the merges always succeed or support
immediatelly retrying the outer transaction instead of retrying the
inner transaction which may be unable to ever merge in the presence
of an invalid outer transaction.
If the inner transaction is aborted, then after a successful merge, the outer
transaction will also be aborted. Merging is done by iterating through
write records and updating the C<owner_or_version> field of the corresponding
PMC handles (if the inner transaction still owns them) to point to
the outer transaction. If this fails, the outer transaction will be aborted.
If the inner transaction writes a value that the
outer transaction also has a write record for, then the outer transaction's
old write record is invalidated and the new write record inherits
its C<saw_version> field. Then the depth of the log is changed, making
the inner transaction's read and write records logically be owned
by the outer transaction.

=head2 Implementing STM_wait()

STM_wait() aborts the current (potentially inner) transaction and waits until
some value the transaction depends on has been changed. To do so,
it first adds the current thread to the change waitlists for every 
value it has a read or write record for (including values in outer
transactions).  Then it aborts the innermost
transaction and 'partially' aborts the outer transactions (merely
removing itself as the owner of any write records). After being taken off
one of the waitlists, it tries to recover ownership of its outer transaction's
write records (using C<replay_writes()>) and verifies its read records are
correct (since it is fairly likely that they will have become invalid).
Outer transactions where this recovery and verification is not successful 
are left as aborted.

Immediately after adding itself to the waitlists and before actually waiting
on them, the STM implementation verifies that the version number has changed
from what is listed in C<saw_version>. For PMC handles whose 
C<owner_or_version> field does not contain a verison number, it checks this
against the C<last_version> field, which will contain the newer version if
another transaction committed before the current one got ownership of the PMC
handle. If the check shows the value already changed, then the waiting is
skipped. Otherwise, the thread is signalled right after a new value is
committed by the committing thread.

The waitlist implementation (in C<src/stm/waitlist.c>) sets a flag
in the per-thread data structure indicating that a thread has been signalled,
so that if it is signalled anytime between calling the function to add itself
to a wailist and calling the wait function, this will be detected.

=head1 SEE ALSO

C<docs/stm/thread-issues.pod>, C<docs/stm/stm-frontend.pod>

=cut
