=pod

=head1 Overview of the Punie Compiler

The heart of the Punie compiler is punie.pir in languages/punie. It does
all the work of slurping up the source file, parsing it, running the
resulting parse tree through 3 transformations, compiling the resulting
source code, and executing it. One useful tool for development here is
turning on and off the tree dumps from each stage in the tree
transformations.  Sometimes it's very helpful to see, for example, that
the transformation from parse tree to abstract syntax tree has gone as
you expected, but the transformation to opcode syntax tree produced the
wrong structure.

=head2 Stage 1, Parsing:

Parsing is handled by PGE. The core grammar is in lib/punie.g. During
the build process this is compiled down to a PIR file
lib/punie_grammar_gen.pir. This PIR file is then included in
lib/PunieGrammar.pir, the main class of the Punie parser (i.e. the
generated PIR is basically a role that adds some methods to the grammar
class). PunieGrammar.pir also contains the rules defined for the
operator precedence parser. The <oexpr> rule allows the recursive
descent parser to call into the operator precedence parser. The OPP rule
"term:", allows the operator precedence parser to call back into the
recursive descent parser. The effect is a smooth integration of two very
different styles of parsing.

The result of the parsing phase is a tree of PGE::Match objects, each
representing the result of one rule, subrule, or capture. [Need to talk
a bit more about the results, when they come back as an array and when
they come back as a hash.]

=head2 Stage 2, Abstract Syntax Tree:

The first transformation is from the parse tree to an abstract syntax
tree. This is handled by the TGE grammar lib/pge2past.g. Unfortunately,
at the moment, the internal core of all the tree grammar rules is
written in PIR. It's ugly (the lack of control structures and easy
access to data structures is particularly annoying), and will eventually
change, but for now it gives us flexibility to explore what we want a
tree-grammar language to be able to do. The tree grammar rules give you
two parameters to work with in the body of each rule: 'tree' is the top
level node for the entire tree and all operations are called on it
because it has the total context information, 'node' is the specific
node that this rule was called to operate on. Each rule defines an
"attribute" of a particular node type. Because this is a tree
transformation, the most common attribute defined is "result", which
returns the transformed structure for the node it was called on.

The transformation from the parse tree is the most difficult one,
because the nodes produced by PGE don't know their own name. That is,
the result PGE::Match object doesn't know that it's a
PunieGrammar::lineseq match. Instead, the match object is stored as a
value for a key of "PunieGrammar::lineseq". So, you'll see a number of
places throughout the code where it checks for a particular key in the
current node and then dispatches the value of that key, specifying the
name of the node in the call (PunieGrammar::block is an example of this
kind of rule). Other places iterate through the hash keys and dispatch
each key/value pair as a node to transform and the node name
(PunieGrammar::line is an example of this kind of rule).

A third kind of rule in pge2past.g is the set of rules defined for the
results of the operator precedence parser. These do know their own name,
but it's stored in a "type" hash key inside the node. So, the "result"
rule for an "expr" match ("expr: result") just checks the type of the
match object, and then dispatches to either the "op" rule or the "term"
rule, depending on whether the match was an operator or a term. (This is
a little hackish, and I suspect there's a better way to do it if we
tweak the way PGE produces results. We'll re-examine it later.)

It's helpful when reading or writing these rules to do a text dump of a
parse tree, because you can immediately see which nodes are the children
of other nodes.

=head2 Stage 3, Opcode Syntax Tree:

The second transformation turns the abstract syntax tree into a
lower-level opcode syntax tree. This is done by the TGE grammar
lib/past2post.g. For the most part, these rules are simpler than the
first set, because all they have to do is iterate through the children
of a node and call for the results of its children. The rule doesn't
have to figure out what the children are called, because each child
knows its own type, and the dispatch is done by the type of the node. At
this stage, the trickiness comes in with collapsing and expanding nodes.
Some nodes you'll see don't actually create a node to return, they just
return the result of their child (PAST::Stmt is an example of this kind
of rule). These are being collapsed. (In particular with "PAST::Stmt"
and "PAST::Expr", statements and expressions are semantically
significant on the level of an abstract syntax tree, but on the level of
the opcode syntax tree all that matters are sequences of opcodes.) Other
nodes you'll see return a "POST::Ops" type ("PAST::Op: print_op" is an
example of this kind of rule). These are nodes that expand into multiple
nodes, where a single HLL construct corresponds to a series of
assembly-level operations. The POST::Ops nodes have an optional
attribute "tmpvar", that says where to find the calculated value of the
series of opcodes (very common when you have something like a complex
conditional expression in the HLL, that translates to a series of
opcodes resulting in a single binary value used in the conditional
opcode).

One significant addition to this stage is a lookup table for transforming
the HLL operator names to their low-level Parrot equivalents, in
lib/PunieOpLookup.pir. The basic idea is to keep all of these changes in
one place so it's more maintainable, and to keep them all in one
transformation stage so the AST closely corresponds to the HLL, while
the OST closely corresponds to the assembly language.

=head2 Stage 4, PIR Output:

The final transformation turns the opcode syntax tree into PIR code.
This is handled by the TGE grammar lib/post2pir.g. It traverses the
syntax tree much like stage 3 does, but each rule returns a string of
PIR source code instead of returning a transformed tree node.
(Ultimately this won't be done with a tree grammar, but it works for
now.) Ideally, there isn't much in the way of node manipulation going on
in this stage. At the moment, I've got a bit of hackishness leftover in
the translation of conditionals, but I'll be moving that up into the
PAST->POST transformation.

Note that POST::Ops nodes are flattened out into a simple sequence of
statements (they're a convenient semantic abstraction in the opcode
tree, but not syntactically relevant in the PIR output).

=cut
