# Copyright (C) 2007-2009, Parrot Foundation.
# $Id$

=head1 Metacommitter Guide

The procedure below describes how to manage the list of Parrot committers.

See F<docs/project/roles_responsibilities.pod> for more details on the
various roles in the Parrot project, including the Metacommitter role.

=head2 Instructions the new committer must follow

This procedure must be performed by the new committer before
the Metacommitter can add commit rights.

=over 4

=item 1

Create an account on L<https://trac.parrot.org/parrot>.

=back

You only need to create one account for both the "parrot" and
"languages" repositories, though the Metacommitter will need to grant
permissions to the two repositories separately.

=head2 Instructions for the Metacommitter

The new committer must perform the above procedure before
the Metacommitter can add commit rights.

=over 4

=item 1

Login to Trac at L<https://trac.parrot.org/parrot/>

=item 2

Navigate to the Admin -> Permissions page,
L<https://trac.parrot.org/parrot/admin/general/perm>

=item 3

If the user is not already in the "developer" group (for access to
administer tickets), enter the username in the "Add Subject to Group"
box, and add them to the "developer" group.


=item 4

Navigate to the Admin -> Subversion Access page
L<https://trac.parrot.org/parrot/admin/subversion/svnauthz> and select
the "parrot_committers" group.

=item 5

Select the username from the "Add Group Member to parrot_committers"
listbox, and click the "Add" button. (Note that the username won't
appear in the drop box until they've been granted "developer"
permissions.)

=back

Congratulate the new member publicly by sending an email to
parrot-dev@lists.parrot.org, and copying the new committer.

The steps for the "languages" repository and Trac instance are the same,
except the URLs are L<https://trac.parrot.org/languages/...> and the
committer group is "languages_committers".

Note that commit messages from the new member will be automatically held
pending list-admin approval.

=head2 To manage the list of Metacommitters

Only existing Metacommitters can perform this activity.

=over 4

=item 1

Navigate to the Admin -> Permissions page
L<https://trac.parrot.org/parrot/admin/general/perm> and add/remove
"admin" users as desired.

=back 

=head2 To manage the list of Bug Admins.

Only existing Metacommitters can perform this activity.

=over 4

=item 1

Navigate to the Admin -> Permissions page
L<https://trac.parrot.org/parrot/admin/general/perm> and add/remove
"developer" users as desired.

Verify that the username is the one the user intends to use to
administer tickets. (Some bugadmins have multiple Trac accounts.)

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

F<docs/project/roles_responsibilities.pod>, F<RESPONSIBLE_PARTIES>

=cut
