# Copyright (C) 2001-2009, Parrot Foundation.
# $Id$

=head1 PDD 9: Garbage Collection Subsystem

=head2 Abstract

This PDD specifies Parrot's garbage collection subsystems.

=head2 Version

$Revision$

=head2 Definitions

=head3 Garbage collection (GC)

Garbage collection is a process of freeing up memory that is no longer used by
the interpreter, by determining which objects will not be referenced again and
can be reclaimed.

=head3 Simple mark

All reachable objects are marked as alive, first marking a root set, and then
recursively marking objects reachable from other reachable objects. Objects
not reached are considered dead. After collection, all objects are reset to
unmarked, and the process starts again.

=head3 Tri-color mark

Instead of a simple separation of marked (as live) and unmarked (dead), the
object set is divided into three parts: white, gray, and black. The white
objects are presumed dead. The gray objects have been marked as live by some
other object, but haven't yet marked the objects they refer to. The black
objects are live, and have marked all objects they directly refer to.

In the initial run, all objects start as white and the root set is marked
gray.  The marking process changes white objects to gray (marking them from
another gray object), and gray objects to black (when all objects they refer
to are marked). When the gray set is empty, all live objects have been marked
and the white set can be collected. After a collection run, all black objects
are reset to white, the root set to gray, and the process begins again.

The advantage of a tri-color mark over a simple mark is that it can be broken
into smaller stages.

=head3 Mark-and-sweep

In this GC scheme, after all reachable objects are marked as live, a sweep
through the object arenas collects all unmarked objects.

=head3 Copying collection

In this scheme, live objects are copied into a new memory region. The entire
old memory region can then be reclaimed.

=head3 Compacting collection

In this scheme, live objects are moved closer together, eliminating fragments
of free space between live objects. This compaction makes later allocation of
new objects faster, since the allocator doesn't have to scan for fragments of
free space.

=head3 Reference counting

In this scheme, all objects have a count of how often they are referred to by
other objects. If that count reaches zero, the object's memory can be
reclaimed. This scheme doesn't cope well with reference loops--loops of dead
objects, all referencing one another but not reachable from elsewhere, never
get collected.

=head3 Stop-the-world

A common disadvantage of a simple mark implementation is that the entire
system (including all threads that use the same memory pools) must be
suspended while the whole memory set is examined during marking and
collection.  Normal operation continues only after the whole GC cycle is
performed. This can lead to arbitrarily long pauses during program execution.

=head3 Incremental

Rather than suspending the system for marking and collection, GC is done in
small increments intermittent with normal program operation. Some
implementations perform the marking as part of ordinary object access.

=head3 Real-time

The pauses caused by GC don't exceed a certain limit.

=head3 Generational

The object space is divided between a young generation (short-lived
temporaries) and one or more old generations. Only young generations are reset
to white (presumed dead). Avoiding scanning the old generations repeatedly can
considerably speed up GC.

Generational collection does not guarantee that all unreachable objects will
be reclaimed, so in large systems it is sometimes combined with a
mark-and-sweep or copying collection scheme, one for light collection runs
performed frequently, and the other for more complete runs performed rarely.

=head3 Concurrent

GC marking and collection runs as a separate thread, sometimes with multiple
threads participating in GC. On a multi-processor machine, concurrent GC may
be truly parallel.

=head2 Synopsis

Not applicable.

=head2 Description

=over 4

=item - Parrot provides swappable garbage collection schemes. The GC scheme
can be selected at configure/compile time.  The GC scheme cannot be changed
on-the-fly at runtime, but in the future may be selected with a command-line
option at execution time.

=item - All live PMCs must be reachable from the root set of objects in the
interpreter.

=item - Garbage collection must be safe for objects shared across multiple
interpreters/threads.

=item - The phrase "dead object detection" and abbreviation "DOD" are
deprecated.

=back

=head2 Implementation

Parrot supports pluggable garbage collection cores, so ultimately any garbage
collection model devised can run on it. However, different GC models are more
or less appropriate for different application areas. The current default
stop-the-world mark-and-sweep model is not well suited for concurrent/parallel
execution. We will keep the simple mark-and-sweep implementation, but it will
no longer be primary.

Parrot really has two independent GC models, one used for objects (PMCs) and
the other used for buffers (including strings). The core difference is that
buffers cannot contain other buffers, so incremental marking is unnecessary.
Currently, PMCs are not allowed to move after creation, so the GC model used
there is not copying nor compacting.

The primary GC model for PMCs, at least for the 1.0 release, will use a
tri-color incremental marking scheme, combined with a concurrent sweep scheme.

=head3 Terminology

A GC run is composed of two distinct operations: Finding objects which are
dead (the "trace" or "mark" phase) and freeing dead objects for later reuse
(the "sweep" phase). The sweep phase is also known as the collection phase.
The trace phase is less frequently known as the "dead object detection" phase.
The use of the term "dead object detection" and its acronym DOD has been
deprecated.

=head3 Initial Marking

Each PMC has a C<flags> member which, among other things, facilitates garbage
collection. At the beginning of the mark phase, the C<PObj_is_live_FLAG> and
C<PObj_is_fully_marked_FLAG> are both unset, which flags the PMC as presumed
dead (white). The initial mark phase of the collection cycle goes through each
PMC in the root set and sets the C<PObj_is_live_FLAG> bit in the C<flags>
member (the PMC is gray).  It does not set the C<PObj_is_fully_marked_FLAG>
bit (changing the PMC to black), because in the initial mark, the PMCs or
buffers contained by a PMC are not marked. It also appends the PMC to the end
of a list used for further marking. However, if the PMC has already been
marked as black, the current end of list is returned (instead of appending the
already processed PMC) to prevent endless looping.

The fourth combination of the two flags, where C<PObj_is_live_FLAG> is unset
and C<PObj_is_fully_marked_FLAG> is set, is reserved for PMCs of an older
generation not actively participating in the GC run.

The root set for the initial marking phase includes the following core storage
locations:

=over 4

=item Global stash

=item System stack and processor registers

=item Current PMC register set

=item Stashes

=item PMC register stack

=back

=head3 Incremental Marking

After the root set of PMCs have been marked, a series of incremental mark runs
are performed. These may be performed frequently, between other operations.
The incremental mark runs work to move gray PMCs to black. They take a PMC
from the list for further marking, mark any PMCs or buffers it contains as
gray (the C<PObj_is_live_FLAG> is set and the C<PObj_is_fully_marked_FLAG> is
left unset), and add the contained PMCs or buffers to the list for further
marking.  If the PMC has a custom mark function in its vtable, it is called at
this point.

After all contained PMCs or buffers have been marked, the PMC itself is marked
as black (the C<PObj_is_live_FLAG> and C<PObj_is_fully_marked_FLAG> are both
set). A limit may be placed on the number of PMCs handled in each incremental
mark run.

=head3 Buffer Marking

The initial marking phase also marks the root set of buffers. Because buffers
cannot contain other buffers, they are immediately marked as black and not
added to the list for further marking. Because PMCs may contain buffers, the
buffer collection phase can't run until the incremental marking of PMCs is
completed.

The root set for buffers includes the following locations:

=over 4

=item Current String register set

=item String register set stack

=item Control stack

=back

Once a buffer is found to be live, the C<flags> member of the buffer structure
has the C<PObj_live_FLAG> and C<PObj_is_fully_marked_FLAG> bits set.

=head3 Collection

When the list for further marking is empty (all gray PMCs have changed to
black), the collection stage is started. First, PMCs are collected, followed
by buffers. In both cases (PMC and buffer), the "live" and "fully_marked"
flags are reset after examination for reclamation.

=head4 Collecting PMCs

To collect PMCs, each PMC arena is examined from the most recently created
backwards.  Each PMC is examined to see if it is live, already on the free
list, or constant.  If it is not, then it is added to the free list and marked
as being on the free list with the C<PObj_on_free_list_FLAG>.

=for question
Are the PMCs in the arena examined back-to-front as well?  How about Buffers?
Order of destruction can be important.

=head4 Collecting buffers

To collect buffers, each Buffer arena is examined from the most recently
created backwards.  If the buffer is not live, not already on the free list
and it is not a constant or copy on write, then it is added to the free pool
for reuse and marked with the C<PObj_on_free_list_FLAG>.

=head4 Concurrent collection

For the most part, the variable sets between concurrent tasks don't interact.
They have independent root sets and don't require information on memory usage
from other tasks before performing a collection phase. In Parrot, tasks tend
to be short-lived, and their variables can be considered young generations
from a generational GC perspective. Because of this, a full heavyweight task
will maintain its own small memory pools, quickly born and quickly dying.

Shared variables, on the other hand, do require information from multiple
concurrent tasks before they can be collected. Because of this, they live in
the parent interpreter's global pools, and can only be collected after all
concurrent tasks have completed a full mark phase without marking the shared
variable as live. Because GC in the concurrent tasks happens incrementally
between operations, a full collection of the shared variables can happen
lazily, and does not require a stop-the-world sweep through all concurrent
tasks simultaneously.

=head3 Internal Structures

The different GC cores are independent, but they share some code and
resources.  The arena structures and arena creation routines are common across
most GC cores, and some GC cores also share mark routines.

The main interpreter structure has an mem_pools member, which is a pointer to
an Memory_Pools struct.

=head4 The Memory_Pools structure

The C<Memory_Pools> structure contains pointers to a variety of memory pools,
each used for a specific purpose. Two are Var_Size_Pool pointers (memory_pool,
constant_string_pool), and six are Fixed_Size_Pool structures (pmc_pool,
constant_pmc_pool, constant_string_header_pool).

The C<Memory_Pools> structure holds function pointers for the core defined
interface of the currently active GC subsystem: C<init_pool>, C<do_gc_mark>,
C<finalize_gc_system>. It holds various accounting information for the GC
subsystem, including how many GC runs have been completed, amount of memory
allocated since the last run, and total memory allocated. This accounting
information is updated by the GC system. The current block level for GC mark
and sweep phases is stored in the C<Memory_Pools> structure. 
(See L<Blocking GC>.)

The pointer C<void *gc_private> is reserved for use by the currently active GC
subsystem (with freedom for variation between GC implementations).

=head4 The Var_Size_Pool structure

The C<Var_Size_Pool> structure is a simple memory pool. It contains a pointer 
to the top block of the allocated pool, the total allocated size of the pool,
the block size, and some details on the reclamation characteristics of the 
pool.

=head4 The Fixed_Size_Pool structure

The C<Fixed_Size_Pool> structure is a richer memory pool for object 
allocation. It tracks details like the number of allocated and free objects 
in the pool, a list of free objects, and for the generational GC 
implementation maintains linked lists of white, black, and gray PMCs. It 
contains a pointer to a simple C<Var_Size_Pool> (the base storage of the 
pool). It holds function pointers for adding and retrieving free objects in
the pool, and for allocating objects.

=head3 Internal API

Currently only one GC system is active at a time, selected at configure or
compile time. Future versions will support switching GC systems at
execution-time to accommodate different work loads.

=for question
Does "execution-time" mean "before starting a runcore" or "at some point after
starting a runcore"?

Each GC core provides a standard interface for interaction with the core.

=head4 Initialization

Each GC core declares an initialization routine as a function pointer,
which is installed in F<src/memory.c:mem_setup_allocator()> after
creating C<mem_pools> in the interpreter struct.

=over 4

=item C<void Parrot_gc_XXX_init(Interp *)>

A routine to initialize the GC system named C<XXX>.

The initialization code is responsible for the creation of the header pools
and fills the function pointer slots in the interpreter's C<mem_pools>
member.

=back

=head4 Memory_Pools structure function pointers

Each GC system declares 3 function pointers, stored in the Memory_Pools 
structure.

=over 4

=item C<void (*init_gc_system) (Interp *)>

Initialize the GC system. Install the additional function pointers into
the Memory_Pools structure, and prepare any private storage to be used by
the GC in the Memory_Pools->gc_private field.

=item C<void (*do_gc_mark) (Interp *, int flags)>

Trigger or perform a GC run. With an incremental GC core, this may only
start/continue a partial mark phase or sweep phase, rather than performing an
entire run from start to finish. It may take several calls to C<do_gc_mark> in
order to complete an entire run of an incremental collector.

For a concurrent collector, calls to this function may activate a concurrent
collection thread or, if such a thread is already running, do nothing at all.

The C<do_gc_mark> function is called from the C<Parrot_gc_mark_and_sweep>
function, and should not usually be called directly.

C<flags> is one of:

=over 4

=item C<0>

Run the GC normally, including the trace and the sweep phases, if applicable.
Incremental GCs will likely only run one portion of the complete GC run, and
repeated calls would be required for a complete run. A complete trace of all
system areas is not required.

=item GC_trace_normal | GC_trace_stack_FLAG

Run a normal GC trace cycle, at least. This is typically called when there
is a resource shortage in the buffer memory pools before the sweep phase is
run. The processor registers and any other system areas have to be traced too.

Behavior is determined by the GC implementation, and might or might not
actually run a full GC cycle. If the system is an incremental GC, it might
do nothing depending on the current state of the GC. In an incremental GC, if
the GC is already past the trace phase it may opt to do nothing and return
immediately. A copying collector may choose to run a mark phase if it hasn't
yet, to prevent the unnecessary copying of dead objects later on.

=item GC_lazy_FLAG

Do a timely destruction run. The goal is either to detect all objects that
need timely destruction or to do a full collection. This is called from the
Parrot run-loop, typically when a lexical scope is exited and the local
variables in that scope need to be cleaned up. Many types of PMC objects, such
as line-buffered IO PMCs rely on this behavior for proper operation.

No system areas have to be traced.

=item GC_finish_FLAG

Finalize and destroy all living PMCs. This is called during interpreter
destruction. The GC subsystem must clear the live state of all objects
and perform a sweep in the PMC header pool, so that destructors and finalizers
get called. PMCs which have custom destructors rely on this behavior for
proper operation.

=back

=item C<void (*finalize_gc_system) (Interp *)>

Called during interpreter destruction. Free used resources and memory pools.
All PMCs must be swept, and PMCs with custom destroy VTABLE functions must have
those called.

=item C<void (*init_pool) (Interp *, Fixed_Size_Pool *)>

Initialize the given pool. Populates the C<Fixed_Size_Pool> structure with
initial values, and sets a series of function pointers for working with the
pool. The function pointers used with the pool are discussed next.

=back

=head4 Fixed_Size_Pool function pointers

Each GC core defines 4 function pointers stored in the C<Fixed_Size_Pool>
structures. These function pointers are used throughout Parrot to implement
basic behaviors for the pool.

=over 4

=item C<PObj * (*get_free_object) (Interp *, Fixed_Size_Pool*)>

Get a free object from the pool. This function returns one free object from
the given pool and removes that object from the pool's free list. PObject
flags are returned clear, except flags that are used by the garbage collector
itself, if any. If the pool is a buffer header pool all other object memory
is zeroed.

=item C<void (*add_free_object) (Interp *, Fixed_Size_Pool *, PObj *);>

Add a freed object to the pool's free list. This function is most often called
internally to the GC itself to add items to the free list after a sweep, or
when a new arena is created to add the new items to the free list. It does
not need to be used in this way, however.

=item C<void (*alloc_objects) (Interp *, Fixed_Size_Pool *);>

Allocate a new arena of objects for the pool. Initialize the new arena and add
all new objects to the pool's free list. Some collectors implement a growth
factor which increases the size of each new allocated arena.

=item C<void (*more_objects) (Interp *, Fixed_Size_Pool *);>

Reallocation for additional objects. It has the same signature as
C<alloc_objects>, and in some GC cores the same function pointer is used for
both. In some GC cores, C<more_objects> may do a GC run in an attempt to free
existing objects without having to allocate new ones. This function may also
call C<pool->alloc_objects> internally, to allocate objects if a GC run fails
to free any old objects.

=back

=head4 Write Barrier

Each GC core has to provide the following macros. All of these might be
defined empty, for GC cores which do not use them.

=over 4

=item C<GC_WRITE_BARRIER(Interp *, PMC *agg, PMC *old, PMC *new)>

This macro is invoked when in aggregate C<agg> the element C<old> is getting
overwritten by C<new>. Either C<old>, C<new>, or both may be NULL.

=item C<GC_WRITE_BARRIER_KEY(Interp *, PMC *agg, PMC *old, PObj
*old_key, PMC *new, PObj *new_key)>

Similar to C<GC_WRITE_BARRIER>. Invoked when a hash key C<new_key> is
inserted into hash C<agg> with value C<new>, possibly replacing a key/value
pair C<old_key> and C<old>, respectively. Any of C<old>, C<old_key>, C<new>
or C<new_key> might be C<NULL>.

=back

=head3 Blocking GC

Being able to block GC is important, so newly allocated Buffers or PMCs won't
be collected before they're attached to the live tree. Parrot provides locking
mechanisms to prevent the GC from taking certain actions, such as marking
or sweeping. GC block functions are nesting, and multiple calls to a lock
function requires the same number of calls to the corresponding unlock
function in order to operate the GC normally again. The following functions
are used to block the GC from performing certain actions:

=over 4

=item Parrot_block_GC_mark(Interp *interpreter)

Block the GC mark phase for the passed interpreter, but do not block the sweep
phase. In a stop-the-world collector, this will prevent the entire collection
run, but in an incremental collector this will only block if the GC is in the
trace state.

=item Parrot_block_GC_sweep(Interp *interpreter)

Block the GC sweep phase for the passed interpreter, but do not block the
trace phase.

=item Parrot_unblock_GC_mark(Interp *interpreter)

Unblock the GC mark phase for the passed interpreter, but do not unblock a
blocked sweep phase, if it is blocked using C<Parrot_block_GC_sweep>.

=item Parrot_unblock_GC_sweep(Interp *interpreter)

Unblock the GC sweep phase for the passed interpreter, but do not unblock the
mark phase if it has been blocked by C<Parrot_block_GC_mark>.

=item Parrot_is_blocked_GC_mark(Interp *interpreter)

Test whether the mark phase has been blocked. Notice that the sweep phase can
be locked independently and cannot be determined using this function.

=item Parrot_is_blocked_GC_sweep(Interp *interpreter)

Test whether the sweep phase has been blocked. Notice that the mark phase can
be locked independently and cannot be determined using this function.

=back

=head3 PMC/Buffer API

=head4 Flags

For PMCs and Buffers to be collected properly, you must set the appropriate
flags on them. Directly manipulating these flags is not recommended because
the exact values can be changed over time. A series of macros have been
created in F<include/parrot/pobject.h> that set and check for these flags.
Always use these provided macros when you need to test or set these flags.

=over 4

=item PObj_custom_destroy_FLAG

The PMC has some sort of active destructor, and will have that destructor
called when the PMC is destroyed. The destructor is typically called from
within C<src/gc/api.c:Parrot_gc_free_pmc>.

=item PObj_custom_mark_FLAG

The C<mark> vtable slot will be called during the GC mark phase. The mark
function must call C<Parrot_gc_mark_PObj_alive> for all non-NULL objects
(Buffers and PMCs) that PMC refers to. This flag is typically tested and the
custom mark VTABLE function called from C<src/gc/api.c:mark_special>.

=item PObj_external_FLAG

Set if the buffer points to memory that came from outside Parrot's memory
system.

=item PObj_sysmem_FLAG

Set if the memory came from the system malloc. When the buffer is considered
dead, the memory will be freed back to the system.

=item PObj_COW_FLAG

The buffer's memory is copy on write. Any changes to the buffer must first
have the buffer's memory copied. The COW flag should then be removed.

=back

The following flags can be used by the GC subsystem:

=over 4

=item PObj_live_FLAG

The system considers the object to be alive for collection purposes. Objects
with this flag set should never be collected, freed, destroyed, or put on the
free list.

=item PObj_on_free_list_FLAG

The object is unused, and on the free list for later allocation.

=item PObj_custom_GC_FLAG

Mark the buffer as needing GC.

=back

=head2 Attachments

None.

=head2 Footnotes

None.

=head2 References

"Uniprocessor Garbage Collection Techniques"
http://www.cs.rice.edu/~javaplt/311/Readings/wilson92uniprocessor.pdf

"A unified theory of garbage collection":
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1028982

"Scalable Locality-Conscious Multithreaded Memory Allocation":
http://people.cs.vt.edu/~scschnei/papers/ismm06.pdf

"Parallel and concurrent garbage collectors":
http://chaoticjava.com/posts/parallel-and-concurrent-garbage-collectors/

"Region-Based Memory Management":
http://www.irisa.fr/prive/talpin/papers/ic97.pdf

Dan's first musings on the GC subsystem:
http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-all@perl.org/msg14072.html

Semi-timely and ordered destruction:
http://www.sidhe.org/~dan/blog/archives/000199.html

=cut

__END__
Local Variables:
  fill-column:78
End:
vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
