# Copyright (C) 2001-2006, Parrot Foundation.
# $Id$

=head1 Lexical Variables

=head2 Version

$Revision$

=head2 Abstract

This document defines the requirements and implementation strategy for
lexically scoped variables.

=head2 Synopsis

    .sub foo
        .lex "$a", P0
        P1 = new Integer
        P1 = 13013
        store_lex "$a", P1
        print P0            # prints 13013
    .end

    .sub bar :outer(foo)
        P0 = find_lex "$a"  # may succeed; depends on closure creation
    .end

    .sub baz
        P0 = find_lex "$a"  # guaranteed to fail: no .lex, no :outer()
    .end

    .sub corge
        print "hi"
    .end                    # no .lex and no :lex, thus: no LexInfo, no LexPad


    # Lexical behavior varies by HLL.  For example,
    # Tcl's lexicals are not declared at compile time.

    .HLL "Tcl"
    .loadlib 'tcl_group'

    .sub grault :lex        # without ":lex", Tcl subs have no lexicals
        P0 = find_lex "x"   # FAILS

        P0 = new Integer    # really TclInteger
        P0 = 42
        store_lex "x", P0   # creates lexical "x"

        P0 = find_lex "x"   # SUCCEEDS
    .end

=head2 Description

For Parrot purposes, "lexical variables" are variables stored in a
hash (or hash-like) PMC associated with a subroutine invocation,
a.k.a. a call frame.

=head3 Conceptual Model

=head4 LexInfo PMC

LexInfo PMCs contain what is known at compile time about lexical variables of
a given subroutine: their names (for most languages), perhaps their types,
etc.  They are the interface through which the PIR compiler stores and
validates compile-time information about lexical variables.

At compile time, each newly created Subroutine (or Subroutine derivative,
e.g. Closure) that uses lexical variables will be populated with a PMC of
HLL-mapped type LexInfo.  (Note that this type may actually be Null in some
HLLs, e.g. Tcl.)

=head4 LexPad PMC

LexPads hold what becomes known at run time about lexical variables of a given
invocation of a given subroutine: their values, of course, and for some
languages (e.g. Tcl) their names.  They are the interface through which the
Parrot runtime stores and fetches lexical variables.

At run time, each call frame for a Subroutine (or Subroutine derivative) that
uses lexical variables will be populated with a PMC of HLL-mapped
type LexPad.  Note that call frames for subroutines without lexical
variables will omit the LexPad.

From the interface perspective, LexPads are basically Hashes, with strings as
keys and PMCs as values.  They extend the basic Hash interface with
specialized initialization (requiring a reference to an associated LexInfo)
and the query METHOD C<get_lexinfo()> (to return it).

LexPad keys are unique.  Therefore, in each subroutine, there can be only one
lexical variable with a given name.

In the normal use case, LexPads are not exposed to user code (not for any
special reason; it just worked out that way).  Instead, specialized opcodes
implement the common use cases.  Specialized opcodes are particularly a Good
Idea here because most lexical usage involves searching more than one LexPad,
so a single LexPad reference wouldn't be as useful as one might expect.  And,
of course, opcodes can cheat ... er, can be written in optimized C.  :-)

TODO: Describe how lexical naming system interacts with non-ASCII character
      sets.

=head4 Lexical Lookup Algorithm

If Parrot is asked to access a lexical variable named $var, Parrot
follows the following strategy.  Note that fetch and store use the
exact same approach.

Parrot starts with the currently executing subroutine $sub, then loops
through these steps:

  1. Starting at the current call frame, walk back until an active frame is
     found that is executing $sub.  Call it $frame.

     (NOTE: The first time through, $sub is the current subroutine and $frame
     is the currently live frame.)

  2. Look for $var in $frame.get_lexpad using standard Hash methods.

  3. If the given pad contains $var, fetch/store it and REPORT SUCCESS.

  4. Set $sub to $sub.outer.  (That is, the textually enclosing subroutine.)
     But if $sub has no outer sub, REPORT FAILURE.

=head4 LexPad and LexInfo are optional; the ":lex" attribute

Parrot does not assume that every subroutine needs lexical variables.
Therefore, Parrot defaults to I<not> creating LexInfo or LexPad PMCs.  It only
creates a LexInfo when it first encounters a ".lex" directive in the
subroutine.  If no such directive is found, Parrot does not create a LexInfo
for it at compile time, and therefore cannot create a LexPad for it at run
time.

However, an absence of ".lex" directives is normal for some languages
(e.g. Tcl) which lack compile-time knowledge of lexicals.  For these
languages, the additional Subroutine attribute ":lex" should be specified.  It
forces Parrot to create LexInfo and LexPads.

=head4 Closures

NOTE: This section should be taken using the "as-if" rule: Parrot behaves as
if this section were literally true.  As always, short cuts (development and
runtime) may be taken.

Closures are specialized Subroutines that carry their I<lexical environment>
along with them.  A lexical environment, which we will call a "LexEnv" for
brevity, is a list of LexPads to be searched when looking for lexical
variables.  Its implementation may be as simple as a basic PMC array, but any
ordered integer-indexed collection will do.

=head4 Closure creation: Capturing the lexical environment

The C<newclosure> op creates a Closure from a Subroutine and gives that
Closure a new LexEnv attribute.  The LexEnv is then populated with pointers to
the current I<enclosing> LexPads.  The definition of "enclosing" is not
obvious, though.

The algorithm used to find "enclosing" LexPads is a loop of the following
steps, starting with $sub set to the running Subroutine (which is a Closure):

  1. Starting at the current call frame, walk back until an active frame is
     found that is executing $sub.  Call it $frame.

     (NOTE: The first time through, $sub is the current subroutine and $frame
            is the currently live frame.)

  2. Append $frame's LexPad to the LexEnv.

  3. If $sub has a LexEnv, append $sub's LexEnv to the LexEnv being built,
     and END LOOP.  Otherwise:

  4. Set $sub to $sub.outer.  (That is, the textually enclosing subroutine.)
     But if $sub has no outer sub, END LOOP.

NOTE: The C<newclosure> opcode should check to make sure that the target
Subroutine has an C<:outer()> attribute that points back to the currently
running Subroutine.  This is a requirement for closures.

=head4 Closure runtime: Using the lexical environment

At runtime, the C<find_lex> opcode behaves differently in closures.  It has no
need to walk the call stack finding LexPads - they have all already been
collected conveniently together in the LexEnv.  Therefore, in a Closure,
C<find_lex> I<ignores> the call stack, and instead searches (1) the current
call frame's LexPad - i.e. the Closure's own lexicals -- and then (2) the
LexPads in the LexEnv.

=head4 HLL Type Mapping

The implementation of lexical variables in the PIR compiler depends on two new
PMCs: LexPad and LexInfo.  However, the default Parrot LexPad and LexInfo PMCs
will not meet the needs of all languages.  They should suit Perl 6, for
example, but not Tcl.

Therefore, it is expected that HLLs will map the LexPad and LexInfo types to
something more appropriate (e.g. TclLexPad and TclLexInfo).  That mapping will
automatically occur when the appropriate ".HLL" directive is in force.

Using Tcl as an extreme example: TclLexPad will likely be a thin veneer on
PMCHash.  Meanwhile, TclLexInfo will likely map to Null: Tcl provides no
reliable compile-time information about lexicals; without any compile-time
information to store, there's no need for TclLexInfo to do anything
interesting.

=head4 Nested Subroutines Have Outies; the ":outer" attribute

For HLLs that support nested subroutines, Parrot provides a way to denote that
a given subroutine is conceptually "inside" another.  Lookup for lexical
variables starts at the current call frame and proceeds through call frames
that invoke "outer" subroutines.  The specific meaning of "outer" is defined
below, but it's designed to support the common linguistic structure of nested
subroutines where inner subs refer to lexical variables contained in outer
blocks.

Note that "outer" and "caller" are very different concepts!  For example,
given the Perl 6 code:

   sub foo {
      my $a = 1;
      my sub a { eval '$a' }
      return &a;
   }

The C<&foo> subroutine is the outer subroutine of C<&a>, but it is not the
caller of C<&a>.

In the above example, the definition of the Parrot subroutine implementing
&a must include a notation that it is textually enclosed within C<&foo>.
This is a static attribute of a Subroutine, set at compile time and never
changed thereafter.  (Unless you're evil, or Damian.  But I repeat myself.)
This information is given through an C<:outer()> subroutine attribute, e.g.:

    .sub a :outer(foo)

Note that the "foo" sub B<must> be compiled first; in other words, "foo" must
appear before "a" in the source text.  Compilers can easily do this via
preorder traversal of lexically-nested subs.

=head3 Required Interfaces: LexPad, LexInfo, Closure

=head4 LexInfo

Below are the standard LexInfo methods that all HLL LexInfo PMCs may support.
Each LexInfo PMC should only define the methods that it can usefully
implement, so the compiler can use method lookup failure to generate useful
diagnostics (e.g. "register aliasing not supported by Tcl lexicals").

Each language's LexInfo will implement methods that are helpful to that
language's LexPad.  In the extreme case, LexInfo can be Null -- but if it is,
the given HLL should not generate any ".lex*" directives.

=over 4

=item B<void init_pmc(PMC *sub)>

Called exactly once.

=item B<PMC *get_sub()>

Return the associated Subroutine.

=item B<void declare_lex_preg(STRING *name, INTVAL preg)>

Declare a lexical variable that is an alias for a PMC register.  The PIR
compiler calls this method in response to a C<.lex STRING, PREG> directive.
For example, given this preamble:

    .lex "$a", $P0
    $P1 = new Integer

These two opcodes have an identical effect:

    $P0 = $P1
    store_lex "$a", $P1

And these two opcodes also have an identical effect:

    $P1 = $P0
    $P1 = find_lex "$a"

=back

=head4 LexPad

LexPads start by implementing the Hash interface: variable names are string
keys, and variable values are PMCs.

In addition, LexPads must implement the following methods:

=over 4

=item B<void init_pmc(PMC *lexinfo)>

Called exactly once.  Note that Parrot guarantees that this method will be
called after the new Context object is made current.  It is recommended that
any LexPad that aliases registers take a pointer to the current Context at
C<init_pmc()> time.

=item B<PMC *get_lexinfo()>

Return the associated LexInfo.

=back

=head4 Closure

For debugging and introspection, the Closure PMC should support:

=over 4

=item B<PMC *get_lexenv()>

Return the associated LexEnv, an ordered integer-index collection (e.g. an
Array) of LexPads captured at C<newclosure> time.

=back

=head3 Default Parrot LexPad and LexInfo

The default LexInfo supports lexicals only as aliases for PMC registers.  It
therefore implements C<declare_lex_preg()>.  (Internally, it could be a Hash
of some kind, where keys are String variable names and values are integer
register numbers.)

The default LexPad (like all LexPads) implements the Hash interface.  When
asked to look up a variable, it finds the corresponding register number by
querying its associated LexInfo.  It then gets or sets the given numbered
register in its associated Parrot Context structure.

=head3 Introspection without Call Frame PMCs

Due to implementation concerns, it will not be until late in Parrot
development -- if ever -- that call frames will be available to user code as
PMCs.  Until then, the interpreter and continuation PMCs will be the interface
to use to get frame info.

For example, to get the immediate caller's LexPad, use:

    $P0 = getinterp
    $P1 = $P0["lexpad"; 1]

To access a sub's C<:outer> subroutine, use the C<get_outer()> method:

    .include "interpinfo.pasm"
    interpinfo $P1, .INTERPINFO_CURRENT_SUB
    $P2 = $P1."get_outer"()

Here, C<$P1> contains information on the current subroutine. C<$P2> will
contain C<$P1>'s outer subroutine.

To get C<$P2>'s outer subroutine (if any), the same method can be used on
C<$P2> itself:

    $P3 = $P2."get_outer"()


Using the C<interpinfo> instruction is one way to do it. Another way is this:

    $P0 = getinterp
    $P1 = $P0["outer"; "sub"]
    $P2 = $P0["outer"; "sub"; 2] # get the outer sub of the current's outer
                                 # subroutine

It is also possible to get the C<:outer> sub's LexPad, as above:

    $P0 = getinterp
    $P1 = $P0["outer"; "lexpad"]

See [1] for an example.

It's likely that this interface will continue to be available even once call
frames become visible as PMCs.

TODO: Full interpreter introspection interface.

=head2 Implementation

TK.

=head2 Attachments

None.

=head2 Footnotes

None.

=head2 References

=over 4

=item [1]

t/op/lexicals.t

=back

=cut

__END__
Local Variables:
  fill-column:78
End:
