# Copyright (C) 2001-2010, Parrot Foundation.

=head1 PDD 0: Design Document Format

=head2 Abstract

This document defines the content and format of Parrot Design Documents
(PDDs).

=head2 Synopsis

Not applicable.

=head2 Description

PDDs are living design documents, intended to express the intended ideal
designs of Parrot. What our ideal designs are may change from time to time,
especially when the "best" solution is not obvious, or when the current state
of the art has advanced and exposed new alternatives.

The key aspects of Parrot's design are its interface to the outside world --
its feature set -- and its internal structure, both in code and in the broader
project. PDDs should describe the ideal designs towards which Parrot is
progressing. In the rare instances where a system is 100% perfect in every
conceivable way, the PDD should provide an accurate overview of that system.
In all other cases, a non-draft PDD is the authoritative version of what
Parrot should be and what it should provide. If Parrot and a PDD disagree,
the PDD should be considered correct.

PDDs should typically not discuss the implementation details, low-level
details, specific functions, macros, or data structures, or other things of a
similar nature. Those things are transient and may be open to frequent
modifications. Those types of documentation will be located elsewhere.

PDDs may document design trade-offs, i.e. the paths not chosen and the reasons
why. Sometimes, for conciseness and readability, PDDs won't go into much
about all unused alternatives. The history of the evolution of Parrot design
is located in the source code repository, and won't typically be discussed
in the PDDs. The exact reasoning which lead to certain designs also likely
won't be discussed in the PDDs.

=head2 Implementation

All PDDs should use the template at F<docs/pdds/pdd_template.pod>, and should
follow the guidelines of this document. This document may also be used as
an example of proper formatting and style.

=head3 Format

For consistency with other documentation found throughout the Parrot
repository, PDDs will use Perl5 flavored POD markup.

The canonical versions of all PDDs will be written in English. It is up to
the discretion of the individual authors and contributors whether American
or English or other dialects are to be used. PDDs are design documents for
technical software, and do not need to be held to the same standards of style
or consistency as fine literature.

PDDs should be word-wrapped at column 78.  For Emacs variants, this can be
arranged by putting these lines at the end of the file, after "=cut":

    Local Variables:
      fill-column:78
    End:

See L<pdd_template.pod> for the basic structure of a PDD.  Notes on the
sections:

=over 4

=item I<name>:

A short, general description of a specific part of the Parrot design. This may
be a particular subsystem (e.g. the garbage collector), or a more general
topic (e.g. basic Parrot datatypes).

=item Abstract:

A quick blurb explaining the purpose of the PDD.

=item Synopsis I<(optional)>:

Code snippets showing the semantics of the PDD (if applicable). Notice that
the code snippets might be pseudocode or inaccurate. The exact format of
code, including naming conventions, function signatures, data structures and
macros is beyond the scope of these documents. All code in PDDs should be
treated as pseudocode.

Snippets of certain code, like PIR or PASM snippets, are expected to either
compile (but not necessarily be executed) as is or to be marked as invalid
syntax. Other code, such as C code or pseudo codes is not expected to compile
as is.

=item Description:

A description of the general nature of the PDD and how it relates to
Parrot.

=item Implementation:

A major section of the PDD that encapsulates a free-form discussion of any and
all applicable information related to the final observations, conclusions, and
what-have-you that required writing the document in the first place.

=item References:

References to additional sources of information, but not those necessary for
the PDD itself. These could include links to other sources of discussion or
information which might be relevant for understanding or implementing the
designs discussed in the PDD.

=back

The PDD author may add any additional sections as needed.

=head3 Submission Criteria

Proposed PDDs should be submitted to the parrot-dev mailing list (located
at parrot-dev@lists.parrot.org) for discussion and feedback. Major updates
or modifications to a PDD should likewise be posted for discussion. Small
clarifications, copy edits, or changes which do not significantly alter the
meaning of the document do not require review.

In many cases, a new PDD or an old PDD undergoing major revision will be
located in the drafts directory.

Acceptance of a particular PDD is ultimately up to the Parrot Architect.

In a case where the PDD is deemed inadequate for Parrot developers to follow
as a guide, or where the actual implementation of Parrot exceeds the design
specifications, the PDD can be moved to the drafts directory for review and
modification.

=head3 PDD Translations

Translations are notoriously difficult to keep up to date with the standard
English versions. Translations of PDDs into other languages should include a
C<Version> section with an additional note of specific revision of the
original document.

=back

=head2 References

None.

=cut

__END__
Local Variables:
  fill-column:78
End:
