# Copyright (C) 2010, Parrot Foundation.
# $Id$

=head1 NAME

Tree::Walker - A tool for traversing trees.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Tree::Walker and its subclasses use multi-methods to traverse trees and perform
some operation on them.

Trees are represented as Captures or subclasses of Capture.

This conveniently includes PCT::Node and its subclasses PAST::Node and POST::Node.

=head1 Tree::Walker

=head2 Multi-subs

The Tree::Walker interface is specified by a pair of multi-subs.

The default for both of these takes a Tree::Walker and a Capture.
In addition, there are Tree::Walker methods of the same name as each
multi-method that take a tree argument and call the appropriate multi-sub
with the invocant and the tree.

=over 4

=item walk(Tree::Walker walker, Capture tree)

By default, 'walk' simply calls 'walkChildren' with the same arguments.

Subclasses should specialize this multi-sub in order to act on the traversed
nodes.

Subclasses that wish to traverse the node's children must remember fo call
'walkChildren' in their implementations of the multi-sub.

=item walkChildren(Tree::Walker walker, Capture tree)

Iterates through the children of tree, calling 'walk' with the walker and each
child tree.

This should not typically be overridden.

However, in some rare situations, subclasses may wish to override walkChildren
(for example, in order to add support for traversing new kinds of trees).

=back

=head2 Convenience methods

Convenience methods are provided for Tree::Walker objects are provided to make
traversing trees more convenient in code outside of the Tree::Walker namespace.

=over 4

=item walk(tree)

C<walker.walk(tree)> is equivalent to C<Tree::Walker::walk(walker, tree)>.

=item walkChildren(tree)

C<walker.walkChildren(tree)> is equivalent to
C<Tree::Walker::walkChildren(walker, tree)>.

=back

=cut
