# Copyright (C) 2001-2006, The Perl Foundation.
# $Id$

=head1 NAME

docs/pdds/clip/pdd25_threads.pod - Parrot Concurrency

=head1 ABSTRACT

This document defines the requirements and implementation strategy for
Parrot's concurrency model.

=head1 VERSION

$Revision$

=head1 DEFINITIONS

Concurrency

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=head1 DEFINITIONS

So we can all talk about things the same way, the following
definitons apply. Some of these are drawn from the POSIX thread spec,
and as such we should have a translation section at the end.

=over 4

=item THREAD

An OS level thread. If that makes no sense, neither will any of the
rest of this, in which case I recommend picking up "Programming with
POSIX Threads" by Dave Butenhof, and coming back when you have.

=item MUTEX

This is a low level, under the hood, not exposed to users, thing that
can be locked. They're non-recursive, non-read/write, exclusive
things. When a thread gets a mutex, any other attempt to get that
mutex will block until the owning thread releases the mutex. The
platform-native lock construct will be used for this.

{{ - Nigel Sandever: Will this be macroised to hide the platform native
implementation from the main body of the code?
- Dan: Yes. }}

=item LOCK

This is an exposed-to-HLL-code thing that can be locked. Only PMCs can
be locked, and the lock may or may not be recursive or read/write.

=item CONDITION VARIABLE

The "sleep until something pings me" construct. Useful for queue
construction. Not conceptually associated with a MUTEX. (POSIX
threads require this, so we're going to hide it there behind macros
and/or functions)

{{ - Nigel Sandever: Could you elaborate on the nature of what would constitute
a "ping"?
- Dan: POSIX has a function cond_signal (and cond_broadcast, which is
similar). What happens is a thread grabs the condition variable and
goes to sleep, and sleeps until another thread does a cond_signal,
which then wakes it up. If there are multiple threads sleeping on the
condition variable, only one is woken. (cond_broadcast wakes them all
up) }}

=item RENDEZVOUS POINT

A HLL version of a condition variable.

=item INTERPRETER

Those bits of the Parrot_Interp structure that are absolutely required
to be thread-specific. This includes the current register sets and
stack pointers, as well as security context information. Basically if
a continuation captures it, it's the interpreter.

=item INTERPRETER ENVIRONMENT

Those bits of the Parrot_Interp structure that aren't required to be
thread-specific (though I'm not sure there are any) I<PLUS> anything
pointed to that doesn't have to be thread-specific.

The environment includes the global namespaces, pads, stack chunks,
memory allocation regions, arenas, and whatnots. Just because the
pointer to the current pad is thread-specific doesn't mean the pad
I<itself> has to be. It can be shared.

=item INDEPENDENT THREAD

A thread that has no contact I<AT ALL> with the internal data of any
other thread in the current process. Independent threads need no
synchronization for anything other than what few global things we
have. And the fewer the better, though alas we can't have none at all.

Note that independent threads may still communicate back and forth by
passing either atomic things (ints, floats, and pointers) or static
buffers that can become the property of the destination thread.

=item SHARED THREAD

A thread that's part of a group of threads sharing a common
interpreter environment.

{{ - Leo: I presume that this "group of threads" is one thread pool or
interpreter pool. Could you expand the definition to cover "pool". 
- Dan: Ah, damn, I needed to fix that up before sending it out. Should've been
"SHARED INTERPRETER". A shared interpreter is one that's in an interpreter
pool.

An interpreter pool is a set of interpreters that share common
resources. They're essentially threads in the OS sense, and they have
shared access to pretty much everything. The memory pools, arenas,
and global namespace are shared--pretty much everything except what's
in the interpreter structure itself. }}

=back

=head1 REQUIREMENTS

=head2 Supported Models

=over 4

=item POSIX threads

The threading scheme must be sufficient to support a POSIX
share-everything style of threading, such as is used in perl 5's
"pthread" model, as well as the thread models for Ruby and Python.

=item "Process-type" threads

The scheme must also support the perl 5 "iThreads" threading
model. In this model no data is shared implicitly, and all sharing
must be done on purpose and explicitly. It very much resembles the
Unix fork-process-with-shared-memory-segment model, not a surprise as
it was originally developed with emulation of Unix's fork system in
mind. 

{{ - Nigel Sandever: Pseudo forks?
- Dan: Yeah. On Win32, when Perl forks it starts a new thread and clones the
interpreter and its contents. If you later do an exec in that thread it starts
a new process and grabs hold of it. Definitely a clever trick.  }}

=back

=head2 Guarantees

{{ -Dave Whipp: Maybe this isn't strictly a threading thing, but are we going
to make any guarantees about event orderings? For example, will we guarantee
that a sequence of events send from one thread to another will always be
received in the order they are sent? (Obviously no guarantees about
interleaving of events from other threads). This is usually only important in
distributed environments where multiple paths exists between a pair of
endpoints, but it would be nice for user-code to be able to rely on it. 
- Dan: Hrm. I suppose we really ought to, so we will. If we prioritize
events (and I'm still torn) then they'll be in priority then send
order. 
}}

=over 4

=item No Crashes

The interpreter guarantees that no user program errors of any sort
will crash the interpreter. This includes threading problems. As
such, synchronization issues (where multiple interpreters are
accessing the same shared data) must not crash the interpreter or
corrupt its internal state.

=back

=head2 Assumptions

=over 4

=item System memory allocation routines are threadsafe

We are assuming that the memory allocation system of the base OS is
threadsafe. While some of the C runtime libraries are notoriously
thread dangerous, memory allocation code generally is threadsafe, and
we'll assume that on all platforms. (Though we will, in general,
manage our own memory)

{{ - Nigel Sandever: Is there any likelyhood that memory allocation will be
hidden behind macros at two levels:
 - ALLOCPOOL() for allocating large chunks of memory (ppols) that are
   later sub-allocated (and managed) by:
 - SUBALLOC() for sub allocating within a pool

- Dan: We'll generally hide behind the memory.c routines, if for no other
reason than to allow the embedder to override the memory functions.  We need to
define that at some point... 
- Gordon Henriksen: Are you wanting something akin to Apache 2 pools, which are
hierarchical and designed to reduce path length when freeing blocks of objects?
For instance, all objects and sub-pools allocated during an HTTP request cycle
can be deallocated just by free()'ing the top-level request pool.

I don't think parrot could make use of that model, since it can't very
well guarantee that the user cannot retain references past the lifetime
of the pool. Apache trusts modules not to make such errors; parrot can't
trust the byte-code it's executing any further than it can throw it. A
generational collector is a more likely means by which parrot might
reduce memory-related overhead. 
- Nigel Sandever: Nothing to do with Apache memory pools.

I believe that parrot already has the concept of memory pools in it's
memory management. The idea is that by allocating similarly sized objects
from separate (large) allocations, you can reduce the fragmentation of
chunks and reduce the incidences where the memory need to be GC'd and
compacted.

Allocating an 8 byte chunk from a common memory pool is quite likely to
nip a little off from a previously freed large chunk. When it comes time
reallocate another chunk the same size as that large, freed chunk, although
there is enough room in the over all freespace chain to accommodate it, the
largest available chunk is now 8 bytes or so too small for the requirement.

That induces either a compaction cycle or the need to extend the memory pool
by the size of the large request.

Allocating all small requests from the same pool, and large from another
pool means that you are less likely to fragment the memory and more likely
to be able to re-use an existing slot in the free-space chain for any
given request.

If the allocation of pools, and the allocation of bit-of-a-pool, are
macroised, it makes it possible for OS's where there are multiple APIs
for memory allocation to bypass the CRT memory allocation routines and
use which ever native APis are best suited for the type of allocation.

Personally, I would like to see memory allocation for each class type
be managed by the class constructor itself. This would theoretically allow
each class that has a fixed instance size to manage it's own pool on OS's
where that makes sense. The class would allocate a pool for itself when
loaded and then allocate instances from that pool on new() and deallocate
upon DESTROY. If it's memory pool was exhausted when new was called,
it would invoke the GC on *it's pool only*.

This separation would mean that each run of the GC would have a much smaller
pool of memory to compact and garbage collect when it was invoked. It would
also be less likely to be called, as each allocation from a pool of fixed
sized sub allocations will only ever need to call the GC when it's pool is
entirely exhausted.

But that is a radical departure :), so if would just like to see separate calls
for pool allocation/reallocation and element allocation/reallocation, rather
than having calls to malloc() scattered through out the codebase. 

- Gordon Henrikson: Don't presume that [allocating similarly sized objects
reduces fragmentation and GC]. General purpose memory allocators tend to handle
this scenario... generically. Use of custom allocators is usually a premature
optimization; the best generic memory allocators are very, very good.

But the ultimate effect of the overuse of custom allocators or pools is
to move memory fragmentation to a higher level, preventing the generic
allocator from addressing it even when the memory allocation patterns
would otherwise allow it.

Would much rather see [the allocation of pools] abstracted, as they are now,
beneath an API.  This reduces the number of ways in which compiled parrot
extensions can be incompatible with the parrot core.

A PMC class is free to [manage the memory allocation for its
own class constructor]. Only the PMC header cannot be thus managed, and that's
already pooled.

Th[e idea that such a separation means a smaller pool to compact and garbage
collect] is false. The mark phase will still need to run over the entire
process, else it cannot detect all references into the pool. (Unless you can
provide a type-safety guarantee that your type can only be referenced by other
instances of itself. In which case, your type is necessarily "garbage" and the
best optimization strategy would be dead-code elimination. :)

- Nigel Sandever: If by reference, you mean address, then that is true.

If when a reference is taken, the address of the referent is
stored in arbitrary other data structures, then all memory
be scanned by the GC,

However, if references were not addresses, but an index into a
table of addresses, then only the table need be scanned.

When a reference, or the thing holding it, is deleted, then
the indexed slot in the address table is blanked and subsequent
GC passes looking for references to a referent will no longer
find the reference in the table.

With the addition of a reference count to the table, all references
to a single entity can share the same index, but now I'm groping
back in the direction of reference counting, which is not flavour
of the month:) 

- Gordon Henrikson: I predict the best overall throughput would be with
the sweep or copy phase run immediately after the mark phase, across the
entire process: It would be wasteful to do all that marking and yet
leave known garbage uncollected.

Statistically, multiple pools will individually exhaust themselves
*MORE* frequently than a global pool. The ideal case for collection
frequency is that there is only one pool, or that all pools rise to
capacity concurrently. In these ideal cases, the segregated pools will
exhaust themselves precisely *AS* frequently as a global pool. In any
case, there is no possibility for a decrease in collection events
through the use of pooled memory. As per above, collection events will
also not become less expensive. Thus, expect garbage collection to have
a negative net impact on performance if pooled memory is used. 

- Leo: The problem is not in the fixed sized header pools, its with the
*memory* pool used e.g for string memory.

During GC we are walking the *header* pools, and if we find its buffer
memory being used, we move that buffer memory to a new store, thereby
compacting it. The old memory store(s) are freed then.

So string memory can move around beyond your code. 
}}

=back

=head1 Proposal

The proposal is as follows:

=over 4

=item All global state shall be protected by mutexes

Straightforward enough. This allows for independent threads to
coexist without threatening the state of the proces.

=item Multiple independent interpreters will be allowed

Once again, straightforward enough. With threadsafe protected global
state, there's no issue here.

=item Only one OS thread in an interpreter at once

While there is no requirement that any interpreter be tied to an
underlying OS thread, under no circumstances may multiple OS threads
use a single interpreter simultaneously.

=item A Stop-and-copy communication method will be provided

Parrot will provide a function to make a call into another interpreter
and wait for that call to complete. This call may pass in data and
have data returned to it. The interpreter making the call will block
until the call is complete. The data passed in as parameters will be
copied into the called interpreter, and any return values will be
copied back into the calling interpreter. The called interpreter will
block while the return data is copied back into the calling interpreter.

=item Inter-interpreter events will be provided

Interpreters will be able to post events to other interpreters.

=item Each interpreter will have a unique id

This ID will be independent of the process or OS thread, and will be
constant across the lifetime of the interpreter. Interpreter IDs
I<may> be reused as interpreters are destroyed and recreated, and as
such are only guaranteed valid while an interpreter is in use.

(Note that we may decide to relax this requirement, but doing so
likely means moving to at least 64-bit integers to mark interpreter IDs)

{{ - Nigel Sandever: The provision of method(s) to obtain the native
TIDs/HANDLES would make life for those writing implementation specific
extensions easier.
- Dan: TIDs, definitely. It'll be a sysinfo or interpinfo function. There's the
issue of interpreters binding to different threads, but we'll deal with that.
I'm not sure what the HANDLE is, but explain it and we can work something out.
:) }}

=item Each interpreter show the same process id

All the interpreters within a process will share a process ID. On
those systems where each thread has its own unique ID (such as many
versions of Linux) Parrot will still report a single process ID for
all interpreters.

This process ID will be the ID of the process that first instantiated
Parrot.

{{ - Leo: The term "process id" is really misleading. Again I presume that one
pool is meant here. I'd vote for keeping a process ID what it is and use "pool
id" or such here. 
- Dan: Nope. It's the process ID. Nothing misleading there, unless you've done
threading work under linux, since for a while it gave each thread a separate
PID. 
- Leo: $ ps | grep [p]arrot
17472 pts/0    00:00:00 parrot
17473 pts/0    00:00:00 parrot
17474 pts/0    00:00:00 parrot

So the unless applies ;) This is a single parrot interpreter, with main,
thread-manager, and event-handler thread. 3 PIDs.

- Liz Mattijsen: This _all_ depends on which version of Linux you're using.
Older versions don''t do it that way, and newer versions don't do it either
(the specific versions escape me at the moment, but I know RH9 does _not_ have
pids for threads).

I know, because my Thread::Signal module depends on threads having
pids.  But fewer and fewer Linux systems "support" it (and Linux was
the only one who worked this way to begin with).

- Dan: Right. Linux is, as I said, arguably broken here, but I don't want to
argue that point. That's why I specified that the PID is the process id of
whatever instantiated parrot -- in this case, no matter which thread you're in,
when you ask for the pid from parrot you should get 17472. (In this case, at
least)

Parrot needs to grab the pid at global initialization time and store
it away for later pid queries. }}


=item Interpreter pools will share allocation pools

All the interpreters in an interpreter pool will share header and
memory allocation pools. This means that when there is more than one
interpreter in a pool the memory allocation and collection system
needs to be swapped out, as a copying collector is generally
untenable in a threaded environment.

{{ - Dan: For a copying collector to work, all the mutators must be
blocked, and arguably all readers should be blocked as well. (I think
they need to be, otherwise you may be accessing reclaimed and reused
memory) That means if we keep a copying collector we need to have
everything that accesses strings or pmcs to get a lock on the GC
before every access of every string or PMC. A touch excessive, I
think. 
- Gordon Henriksen: True of non-moving collectors, too. Or, let me put it this
way: non- copying *GC* (the sweep or copy phase) can be threadsafe, but the
mark phase is never threadsafe. The method in which marking is not threadsafe
is a bit more pathological (i.e., it's not the common case as it is with the
copying collector), but a standard tracing DOD cannot be correct when
competeting with mutators. It WILL collect non- garbage (those are MUTATORS,
remember), and the result WILL be Heizenbugs and crashes.

Some of what I've written up [AR see next comment] addresses why. It's pretty
simple to demonstrate a single case to prove the point, but I don't feel like
re-creating the ASCII art right now. :) I'll send that section when I get out
of the office.

parrot will have to be able to suspend all threads in the environment.
Unfortunate, but really quite unavoidable. 

- Dan: I'm not sure that's the case. What we need to do is suspend
metadata mutation--that is, buffers can't be resized while a gc run is
in progress. Other than that, if we have guarantees of aligned atomic
pointer writes (so we don't have word shearing to deal with) we don't
have to stop the mutation of the contents of the buffers themselves.

The only tricky bit comes in with the examination of the root set of
other threads--accessing the hardware register contents of another
running thread may be... interesting. (Which, I suppose, argues for
some sort of volatile marking of the temp variables) 

- Leo: You'll provide the "interesting" part, that is:

  use Psi::Estimate::CPU_Register_Changes_in_Future_till_mark_is_done; 

- Dan: Nah, no need for that one. I need to go back and recheck the
stuff that Gordon posted in case I missed something, but if you put a
lock on the arena allocator this isn't an issue. 

- Gordon Henriksen: Consider this simple object graph:

     Root set = { &A, &B }

     [ A=NULL]
     [ B=&C  ] ---> [ C=....]

Collection begins in thread 1 and marks A as reachable before being
preempted by thread 2:

     [xA=NULL]
     [ B=&C  ] ---> [ C=....]

Thread 2 sets A to &C, and nullifies B before being preempted again by
thread 1:

     [xA=&C  ] ---> [ C=....]
     [ B=NULL]

Thread 1 marks B as reachable:

     [xA=&C  ] ---> [ C=....]
     [xB=NULL]

The mark phase complete, thread 1 sweeps:

     [ A=&???] ---> ???
     [ B=NULL]

C was not marked reachable (although it was) and was thus erroneously
collected, leaving a dangling pointer. This problem applies equally to
copying and mark-sweep collectors. 

- Dan: Ah, OK, I see. The problem comes in where we've got an object in the
transient root set (basically the processor stack and registers) that
gets anchored into the base root set (stash, pads, or whatever) after
the DOD has traced where it's going into and falls out of the
transient root set before the DOD traces over to it.

Race condition. Dammit.

- Gordon Henriksen: (Worse than that. It could come from any untraced
location--or possibly even be brand new, depending upon memory
allocation details.) 

- Dan: Okay, I'd not wrapped my brain around that possibility, which will
make for some interesting DOD tracing, especially on SMP systems. I
was *really* hoping a single lock on the arena allocation system that
the DOD held onto while tracing would be sufficient, but I see that
it isn't.

That means we're going to have to have either a really forgiving DOD
system that takes multiple passes before it collects up a PMC or
buffer (which still isn't safe) or have some way to force a
low-overhead rendezvous.

The obvious rendezvous point is the arena lock, but that's going to
see a lot of contention anyway, and we'd as soon not have a single
one for speed reasons. Feh.

Okay, we're going to mandate that we have read/write locks, each
interpreter pool has one, and mutating vtable entries must get a read
lock on the pool read/write lock. Pricey (ick) but isolated to
mutators. The DOD gets a write lock on it, which'll block all
read/write access so no mutators can be in process while the pool DOD
runs.

I think that'll work. The .1j thread spec requires r/w locks, and we
can fake them on platforms that don't implement them. Hopefully
Nigel's got the Windows scoop so we can see if Win32 has anything
like this (which I'd expect it does) 

- Leo: That is well knowm in the literature as "Tri-Color Invariant": Black are
the already marked (live) PMCs, grey the PMCs on the next_for_GC list,
white the not yet reached PMCs. The strong tri-color invariants states
that no black object may point to a white object, the weak invariant
states, that at least one path from the black to a white object must
contain a grey one.

This can be handled by either stop the world GCs or by intercepting each
read or write access that would change the color of an object and update
the color accordingly. This is e.g. used for incremental GC. As soon as
we have a thread in the background that runs GC, we have to cope with
these issues. 
- Dan: Yeah, point. And since we want to be able to have an incremental DOD
at some point we need to get support for it in now. 

- Leo: Stopping all interpreters seems to be cheaper. The rwlock will sooner or
later stop all interpreters anyway (on first PMC access), so we can omit the
price for the rwlock and just hold the world(s).
- Dan: The rwlock only stops all the interpreters when the DOD runs.
Anything that mutates a PMC gets a *read* lock so that they don't
interfere with each other, and only pause if the DOD is running. The
DOD getting a *write* lock will block any read lock attempts, so when
the DOD is running no mutation can take place. Since mutation doesn't
require any global exclusion it doesn't need a write lock -- the read
lock is sufficient. 
- Leo: Sure. But that would still need to aquire a readers rwlock for each PMC
access. This is more expensive then a mutex. During DOD any PMC access
will halt the interpreter, so we can do that explicitely too and save
the cost for the rwlock overhead. Albeit I can imagine, that aggregates
will need a rwlock anyway. 
- Dan: Well... only the mutating vtable entries need to get the lock, so
that reduces the expense somewhat. Still, I agree, it may be
untenably expensive. 

- Leo: An alternative would be real background incremental GC, *when* running
multiple threads. I estimate the overhead to be in regions of a rwlock (with no
contention of course). 
- Dan: If we have the facilities to do incremental DOD runs then this is
definitely a possibility except for finalizers. Finalizers make
things interesting, though if the background thread doing the DOD is
a member of the interpreter pool then it'd work out OK. 
- Leo: Finalizers and incremental DOD don't play together. The DOD must run to
end to be sure, that the objects isn't referenced any more.
- Dan: Finalizers and incremental DOD work just fine together. At some
point the incremental DOD will figure out that something's dead, just
as the stop-the-world DOD will. It just may take a bit longer. 
- Leo: I wanted to say: "Finalizers & destructors of PMCs that need
timely destruction ...". In the case of dead objects at scope exit. 


- Leo: What about temporary PMCs (or strings)? Evaluating a non-trivial
expression can have lot of these. Each new temp would need a lock on the
memory sub-system.
- Dan: Those won't get marked as shared unless we're unconditionally marking
things as shared. (Though we may just give 'em a mutex anyway) [New temps would
need a lock] only on allocation. We could have a per-thread freelist if we
wanted.  Wouldn't be unreasonable. 
- Leo: This needs either one check per PMC, if its shared or not, or additional
costs for locking temps. Both are rather expensive, compared to the raw
working functionality of a vtable. 

That already smells like separate memory sub-systems. The freelist has
to be filled first. During DOD runs, it has to be refilled. To achieve
some locality of the temp PMCs, you can't just give these to arbitrary
intpreters. Separate free lists seem also to imply separate DOD runs to
cleanup the temps. 

- Leo: Combined with the cost of: "All shared PMCs must have a
threadsafe vtable - The first thing that any vtable function of a shared PMC
must do is to aquire the mutex of the PMCs in its parameter list " 
i.e. typically 3 mutexes, it could be that the vtable of a shared PMC
should just grab one interpreter lock (of the owner of that PMC) and
that not all is shared (especially not the temps). 
- Dan: Yeah, but since PMCs aren't owned by any one interpreter in the pool
but are rather pool-wide you run into either the global-lock problem
(which kills performance on SMP systems) or interpreters potentially
deadlocking on unrelated data access. 
- Leo: Could be. But the performance is the overall throughput. When a lot of
fine grained locks (plus memory subsystem locks for temps) take much
longer then one global lock, then that scheme can nethertheless be
slower on SMP machines. It would scale better though for more CPUs.

Deadlocks shouldn't be a problem, if exactly one vtable (like in
SharedRef) just grabs one and only one lock. 

- Leo: [The Guarantees section] doesn't have anything about user data
integrity. So when 2 threads access a PerlNum, they could get a
mixture of the typically 2 involved words.
- Dan: Potentially, yeah, though it's really unlikely.
- Leo: But: "The first thing that any vtable function of a shared PMC
must do is to aquire the mutex of the PMCs in its parameter list..."
... seems to indicate that even whole ops like add P,P,P are atomic.
- Dan: Yep. They have to be, because they need to guarantee the integrity of
the pmc structures and the data hanging off them (which includes
buffer and string stuff)
- Leo: But isn't that a contradiction? Or better: When even an opcode
like above is atomic, that an access to a shared PerlNum should be
guaranteed being atomic too. 
- Dan: Sure, but there's a *lot* more to user data integrity than atomic
access to individual pieces. That's the least of the problem. The
user data issue is one where you have multiple pieces being updated,
or one piece being updated multiple times--that's the stuff we're not
guaranteeing.

So, while we will make sure that storing a single value into a hash
happens atomically, we won't guarantee that a series of stores into
the hash, or a combination of loads and stores, or even a combination
of reads and writes to a scalar, will happen atomically. 

- Leo: And how does user level locking play together with that?
- Dan: I've not decided -- That was something I thought we might hash out as
we abused the first half of the design doc. Personally I'm all for
the user and low-level lock being the same thing, but that doesn't
have to be the case. There are advantages and disadvantages to either
way of doing things. 

- Damien Neil: Personally, I think it would be better to use
corruption-resistant buffer and string structures, and avoid locking
during basic data access.  While there are substantial differences in VM
design--PMCs are much more complicated than any JVM data type--the JVM
does provide a good example that this can be done, and done efficiently.

Failing this, it would be worth investigating what the real-world
performance difference is between acquiring multiple locks per VM
operation (current Parrot proposal) vs. having a single lock
controlling all data access (Python) or jettisoning OS threads
entirely in favor of VM-level threading (Ruby).  This forfeits the
ability to take advantage of multiple CPUs--but Leopold's initial
timing tests of shared PMCs were showing a potential 3-5x slowdown
from excessive locking.

I've seen software before that was redesigned to take advantage of
multiple CPUs--and then required no less than four CPUs to match
the performance of the older, single-CPU version.  The problem was
largely attributed to excessive locking of mostly-uncontested data
structures. 
}}

As the allocation and collection system is a black box to user
programs and much of the interpreter internals, this isn't a big deal
outside of needing swappable allocation systems, the potential
issue of COW'd shared memory leaking, and the need to switch
allocation schemes mid-execution.

=item Each interpreter has a separate event queue

Some events, such as timers, may be interpreter-specific and, as
such, each interpreter has its own event queue.

=item Each interpreter pool has a shared event queue

Some events, such as IO callbacks, may not be interpreter-specific,
and can be serviced by any interpreter in the interpreter pool. For
these events, there is a pool-wide event queue.

=item PMCs are the coordination point for threads

That is, only PMCs are shared as such between threads. Strings,
specifically, are I<not> shared between interpreters as such

=item All PMCs shared amongst interpreters in a pool must be marked shared

A PMC which is not marked shared may not be handed to another
interpreter. Parrot will prevent this from happening either by
marking the PMC as shared, or throwing an exception when the PMC is
placed in a spot where it may be shared but is not shareable.

=item All shared PMCs must have a threadsafe vtable

The first thing that any vtable function of a shared PMC must do is to
acquire the mutex of the PMCs in its parameter list, in ascending
address order. When the mutexes are released they are not required to
be released in any order.

{{ - Uri: why the ascending address order to grab mutexes? is this to help solve
deadlocks?
- Dan: Yes. The recommendation I've always seen for deadlock avoidance is to
always have all your code grab its mutexes in some fixed order. With source,
it's generally recommended that you grab mutex variables in lexical order.
Since we're all binary we need a different order, and ascending addresses are
reasonably simple to do. 
- Gordon Henriksen: Note that this locking strategy cannot avoid deadlock if
the user is allowed to acquire these locks--HLL locks must be altogether
different beasts from automatic PMC locks. That's okay. Just a design
consequence worth noting for everyone.
- Dan: Oh, arguably it can't avoid deadlock at all, what with vtable methods
having access to the full environment. I can live with deadlocks, only because
there's no real alternative. 
- Gordon Henriksen: But PMC implementations have to fall inside of the trusted
environment, so that's not really a failure. Of course uncooperative code can
break a cooperative algorithm.  

- Sam Vilain: RE: "have all your code grab its mutexes in some fixed order."

Yes; otherwise, you need to back off and start again, if one lock
acquisition fails.

Consider these functions; for the purpose of this example, lexical
lock ordering is implied;

  func1($AAAA, $CCCC, $FFFF, $GGGG, $KKKK);
  func2($BBBB, $DDDD, $FFFF, $IIII, $KKKK);
  func3($FFFF, $KKKK);

So long as the locks are ramped up from the lowest to the highest,
there is no chance of func1 acquiring a lock to be held by func2 (eg,
$KKKK), if that other function already has one of the shared
dependancies (eg, $FFFF).

All well and good.  But, what about recursive locks?

ie

 sub func1($one is locked, $two is locked, $three is locked) {
     for my $x ($one, $two, $three) {
         func2($x.property) if $x.property;
     }
 }

 sub func2($eins is locked) {
     if ($eins.property) {
         func2($eins.property, { });
     }
 }

 $aaa.property = { };
 $bbb.property.property = $aaa;
 $ccc = { };

 if (thork()) {   # fork a thread
    # thread A
    func1($aaa, $bbb, $ccc);
 } else {
    # thread B
    func2($bbb.property);
 }

OK, the execution order that causes the deadlock is:

  1. Thread B - func2() acquires a lock on the $bbb.property PMC.
  2. Thread A - func() acquires a lock on $aaa, $bbb, $ccc.
  3. Thread A - func2() acquires a lock on $aaa.property, which
     returns quickly
  4. Thread A - func2() blocks waiting for a lock on $bbb.property,
     held by func2() in thread B
  5. Thread B - func2() blocks waiting for a lock on
     $bbb.property.property, held by func() in thread A.

So, there are still possibilities for deadlocks, as the non-linear
nature of subroutine calls screws up your nice lock ramping.

In summary, acquiring mutexes in a defined order as a means to avoid
deadlocks only works when you are acquiring them all up front.  If you
are acquiring any later, and you detect a deadlock (ie, a loop of
threads blocking on locks held by each other), you *must* be able to
tell one of them to "ramp off" to holding no locks at all.  ie,
ROLLBACK :).

The bugger is, winding back execution state automatically to when you
last started acquiring locks is probably an intractable problem from
an interpreter's perspective...

Sounds like a job for an exception to me ;-).

  for (1..50) {
     eval {
        func_that_acquires_first_lock($args);
     };
     last unless $@ and $@ =~ m/mutex deadlock/i;
  } 
}}

=item Automatic PMC sharing will be provided

When a PMC is placed into a container which is shared (including
lexical pads and global namespaces) then that PMC will automatically
be marked as shared. It is acceptable for this to trigger an
exception if for some reason a PMC should not be shared between
interpreters.

PMCs are, by default, not shared. This avoids sharing overhead for
PMCs which are only used as temporaries and not shared. (Note that
this is dangerous, and may end up not being done, due to the sharing
of continuations)

{{ - Luke: I don't know why this is dangerous.  A continuation is a data structure
just like an array or a hash.  When you share it, everything "inside" it
gets shared, too.  For a continuation, this could be an awful lot of
stuff, but it's the safe way. 
- Dan: True, but the danger part is if we don't mark everything grabbed by a
continuation as shared by default. If we do, we might as well mark everything
as shared, as there'll be less overhead. }}

=item All interpreter constructs in a pool are shareable

This means that a PMC or string may be used by any interpreter in a
pool. It additionally means that, if full sharing is enabled, that
any interpreter in a pool may invoke a continuation, assuming the
continuation is valid. (That is, a continuation taken at parrot's top
level. Continuations taken within vtable functions, user-defined ops,
or extension code may not be shareable)

=item The embedding API will allow posting events to a pool

Many events are interpreter-specific, often caused by one particular
interpreter requesting an async event that later completes.

=item The embedding API will allow posting events to an interpreter

For events that don't have to go to any particular interpreter, they
can go into the pool's event loop.

=item The embedding API will allow calling a parrot sub with a pool

In those cases where there is an interpreter pool, embedders may call
a parrot sub using the pool as a whole, rather than an individual
interpreter, to run the sub. In that case Parrot may either choose a
dormant interpreter (if there is one) or create a new interpreter in
the pool to run the subroutine.

When the sub is done, Parrot may either cache the created
interpreter or destroy it as it needs to, though in no case will
Parrot ever leave a pool with no interpreters at all.

=back 

=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

[Excerpt from Perl 6 and Parrot Essentials to seed discussion.]

Threads are a means of splitting a process into multiple pieces that
execute simultaneously.  It's a relatively easy way to get some
parallelism without too much work. Threads don't solve all the
parallelism problems your program may have. Sometimes multiple
processes on a single system, multiple processes on a cluster, or
processes on multiple separate systems are better. But threads do
present a good solution for many common cases.

All the resources in a threaded process are shared between threads.
This is simultaneously the great strength and great weakness of
threads. Easy sharing is fast sharing, making it far faster to
exchange data between threads or access shared global data than to
share data between processes on a single system or on multiple
systems. Easy sharing is dangerous, though, since without some sort of
coordination between threads it's easy to corrupt that shared data.
And, because all the threads are contained within a single process, if
any one of them fails for some reason the entire process, with all its
threads, dies.

With a low-level language such as C, these issues are manageable. The
core data types, integers, floats, and pointers are all small enough
to be handled atomically. Composite data can be protected with
mutexes, special structures that a thread can get exclusive access to.
The composite data elements that need protecting can each have a mutex
associated with them, and when a thread needs to touch the data it
just acquires the mutex first. By default there's very little data
that must be shared between threads, so it's relatively easy, barring
program errors, to write thread-safe code if a little thought is given
to the program structure.

Things aren't this easy for Parrot, unfortunately. A PMC, Parrot's
native data type, is a complex structure, so we can't count on the
hardware to provide us atomic access. That means Parrot has to provide
atomicity itself, which is expensive. Getting and releasing a mutex
isn't really that expensive in itself. It has been heavily optimized by
platform vendors because they want threaded code to run quickly. It's
not free, though, and when you consider that running flat-out Parrot
does one PMC operation per 100 CPU cycles, even adding an additional 10
cycles per operation can slow Parrot down by 10%.

For any threading scheme, it's important that your program isn't
hindered by the platform and libraries it uses. This is a common
problem with writing threaded code in C, for example. Many libraries
you might use aren't thread-safe, and if you aren't careful with them
your program will crash. While we can't make low-level libraries any
safer, we can make sure that Parrot itself won't be a danger. There is
very little data shared between Parrot interpreters and threads, and
access to all the shared data is done with coordinating mutexes. This
is invisible to your program, and just makes sure that Parrot itself
is thread-safe.

When you think about it, there are really three different threading
models. In the first one, multiple threads have no interaction among
themselves. This essentially does with threads the same thing that's
done with processes. This works very well in Parrot, with the
isolation between interpreters helping to reduce the overhead of this
scheme. There's no possibility of data sharing at the user level, so
there's no need to lock anything.

In the second threading model, multiple threads run and pass messages
back and forth between each other. Parrot supports this as well, via
the event mechanism. The event queues are thread-safe, so one thread
can safely inject an event into another thread's event queue. This is
similar to a multiple-process model of programming, except that
communication between threads is much faster, and it's easier to pass
around structured data.

In the third threading model, multiple threads run and share data
between themselves. While Parrot can't guarantee that data at the user
level remains consistent, it can make sure that access to shared data
is at least safe. We do this with two mechanisms.

First, Parrot presents an advisory lock system to user code. Any piece
of user code running in a thread can lock a variable. Any attempt to
lock a variable that another thread has locked will block until the
lock is released. Locking a variable only blocks other lock attempts.
It does I<not> block plain access. This may seem odd, but it's the
same scheme used by threading systems that obey the POSIX thread
standard, and has been well tested in practice.

Secondly, Parrot forces all shared PMCs to be marked as such, and all
access to shared PMCs must first acquire that PMC's private lock. This
is done by installing an alternate vtable for shared PMCs, one that
acquires locks on all its parameters. These locks are held only for
the duration of the vtable function, but ensure that the PMCs affected
by the operation aren't altered by another thread while the vtable
function is in progress.

=head1 ATTACHMENTS

None.

=head1 FOOTNOTES

None.

=head1 REFERENCES

Dec 2003 - (Dan ponders threads based on POSIX and Perl 5 experience)
<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e64b22ab7de0a7a6/889b5d8c4cd267b7?lnk=gst&q=threads&rnum=3#889b5d8c4cd267b7>

Dec. 2003 - "threads and shared interpreter data structures"
<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e64ea4ff287e04fd/b71333e282d3d187?lnk=gst&q=threads&rnum=9#b71333e282d3d187>

Jan. 2004 - "Threads Design. A Win32 perspective."
<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/3209629b23306029/52ba9d37425ba015?lnk=gst&q=threads&rnum=8#52ba9d37425ba015>

Jan. 2004 - "Start of threads proposal"
<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/4c7de440da84d5c6/04cfb70b0d81dfba?tvc=1&q=threads#04cfb70b0d81dfba>

Sept. 2005 - "consider using OS threads"
<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/40b50e3aa9255f8e/036a87b5d2b5ed2c?lnk=gst&q=threads&rnum=2#036a87b5d2b5ed2c>

=cut

__END__
Local Variables:
  fill-column:78
End:
