# Copyright: 2001-2006 The Perl Foundation.
# $Id: $

=head1 NAME

docs/pdds/clip/pddXX_events.pod - Parrot Events

=head1 ABSTRACT

This document defines the requirements and implementation strategy for
Parrot's event subsystem.

=head1 VERSION

$Revision: $

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Description of the subject.

=head1 DEFINITIONS

Definitions of important terms. (optional)

=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

[Excerpt from Perl 6 and Parrot Essentials to seed discussion.]

An event is a notification that something has happened: the user has
manipulated a GUI element, an I/O request has completed, a signal has
been triggered, or a timer has expired.  Most systems these days have an
event handler (often two or three, which is something of a problem),
because handling events is so fundamental to modern GUI programming.
Unfortunately, the event handling system is not integrated, or poorly
integrated, with the I/O system, leading to nasty code and unpleasant
workarounds to try and make a program responsive to network, file, and
GUI events simultaneously. Parrot presents a unified event handling
system, integrated with its I/O system, which makes it possible to write
cross-platform programs that work well in a complex environment.

Parrot's events are fairly simple. An event has an event type, some
event data, an event handler, and a priority. Each thread has an event
queue, and when an event happens it's put into the right thread's
queue (or the default thread queue in those cases where we can't tell
which thread an event was destined for) to wait for something to
process it.

Any operation that would potentially block drains the event queue
while it waits, as do a number of the cleanup opcodes that Parrot uses
to tidy up on scope exit. Parrot doesn't check each opcode for an
outstanding event for pure performance reasons, as that check gets
expensive quickly. Still, Parrot generally ensures timely event
handling, and events shouldn't sit in a queue for more than a few
milliseconds unless event handling has been explicitly disabled.

When Parrot does extract an event from the event queue, it calls that
event's event handler, if it has one. If an event doesn't have a
handler, Parrot instead looks for a generic handler for the event type
and calls it instead. If for some reason there's no handler for the
event type, Parrot falls back to the generic event handler, which
throws an exception when it gets an event it doesn't know how to
handle.  You can override the generic event handler if you want Parrot
to do something else with unhandled events, perhaps silently
discarding them instead.

Because events are handled in mainline code, they don't have the
restrictions commonly associated with interrupt-level code. It's safe
and acceptable for an event handler to throw an exception, allocate
memory, or manipulate thread or global state safely. Event handlers
can even acquire locks if they need to, though it's not a good idea to
have an event handler blocking on lock acquisition.

Parrot uses the priority on events for two purposes. First, the
priority is used to order the events in the event queue. Events for a
particular priority are handled in a FIFO manner, but higher-priority
events are always handled before lower-priority events. Parrot also
allows a user program or event handler to set a minimum event priority
that it will handle. If an event with a priority lower than the
current minimum arrives, it won't be handled, instead sitting in the
queue until the minimum priority level is dropped. This allows an
event handler that's dealing with a high-priority event to ignore
lower-priority events.

User code generally doesn't need to deal with prioritized events, so
programmers should adjust event priorities with care. Adjusting the
default priority of an event, or adjusting the current minimum
priority level, is a rare occurrence.  It's almost always a mistake to
change them, but the capability is there for those rare occasions
where it's the correct thing to
do.

=head2 Signals

Signals are a special form of event, based on the Unix signal mechanism.
Parrot presents them as mildly special, as a remnant of Perl's Unix
heritage, but under the hood they're not treated any differently from
any other event.

The Unix signaling mechanism is something of a mash, having been
extended and worked on over the years by a small legion of undergrad
programmers. At this point, signals can be divided into two
categories, those that are fatal, and those that aren't.

Fatal signals are things like 
SIGKILL, which unconditionally kills a process, or SIGSEGV, which
indicates that the process has tried to access memory that isn't part
of your process.  There's no good way for Parrot to catch these
signals, so they remain fatal and will kill your process.  On some
systems it's possible to catch some of the fatal signals, but
Parrot code itself operates at too high a level for a user program to
do anything with them--they must be handled with special-purpose code
written in C or some other low-level language.  Parrot itself may
catch them in special circumstances for its own use, but that's an
implementation detail that isn't exposed to a user program.

Non-fatal signals are things like SIGCHLD, indicating that a
child process has died, or SIGINT, indicating that the user
has hit C<^C> on the keyboard. Parrot turns these signals into events
and puts them in the event queue.  Your program's event handler for the
signal will be called as soon as Parrot gets to the event in the queue,
and your code can do what it needs to with it.

SIGALRM, the timer expiration signal, is treated specially by
Parrot. Generated by an expiring alarm() system call, this signal is
normally used to provide timeouts for system calls that would
otherwise block forever, which is very useful. The big downside to
this is that on most systems there can only be one outstanding
alarm() request, and while you can get around this somewhat with the
setitimer call (which allows up to three pending alarms) it's still
quite limited.

Since Parrot's IO system is fully asynchronous and never blocks--even
what looks like a blocking request still drains the event queue--the
alarm signal isn't needed for this. Parrot instead grabs SIGALRM for
its own use, and provides a fully generic timer system which allows
any number of timer events, each with their own callback functions
and private data, to be outstanding.

=head1 ATTACHMENTS

None.

=head1 FOOTNOTES

None.

=head1 REFERENCES

None.

=cut

__END__
Local Variables:
  fill-column:78
End:
