=pod

=head0 PCT: Parrot Compiler Tools

Z<CHP-8>

So far we've talked a lot about low-level Parrot programming with
PIR and PASM. However, the true power of Parrot is it's ability to
host programs written in high level languages such as Perl 6,
Python, Ruby, Tcl, and PHP. In order to write code in these languages
developers need there to be compilers that convert from the language
into PIR or PASM (or even directly convert to Parrot Bytecode).
People who have worked on compilers before may be anticipating us
to use terms like "Lex and Yacc" here, but we promise that we wont.

Instead of traditional lexical analyzers and parser-generators that
have been the mainstay of compiler designers for decades, Parrot
uses an advanced set of parsing tools called the Parrot Compiler
Tools (PCT)X<Parrot Compiler Tools>. PCT uses a subset of the Perl 6
programming language called I<Not Quite Perl>X<Not Quite Perl> (NQP)
and an implementation of the Perl 6 Grammar Engine X<Perl 6 Grammar
Engine> (PGE) to build compilers for Parrot. Instead of using
traditional low-level languages to write compilers, we can use a
modern dynamic language like Perl 6 to write it instead. On a more
interesting note, this means that the Perl 6 compiler is itself
being written in Perl 6, a mind-boggling process known as
C<bootstrapping>.

=head1 PCT Overview

PCT is a collection of classes which handle the creation of a
compiler and driver program for a high-level language. The
C<PCT::HLLCompiler> class handles building the compiler front end
while the C<PCT::Grammar>  and C<PCT::Grammar::Actions> classes handle
building the parser and lexical analyzer. Creating a new HLL compiler
is as easy as subclassing these three entities with methods specific
to that high-level language.

=head2 Grammars and Action Files

Creating a compiler using PCT requires three basic files, plus any
additional files needed to implement the languages logic and library:

=over 4

=item* A main file

The main file should contain the C<:main> function that is the driver
program for the compiler. Here, a new C<PCT::HLLCompiler> object is
instantiated, libraries are loaded, and necessary special global
variables are created. The driver program is typically written in PIR,
although thankfully they tend to be very short. Most of the action
happens elsewhere.

=item* A parser file

The grammar for the high level language is specified using the Perl 6
grammar engine (PGE) and is stored in a C<.pg> file. This file should
subclass the C<PCT::Grammar> class and implement all the necessary
rules to successfully parse the language.

=item* An actions file

Actions files are written in NQP. They take match objects generated by
the grammar file and convert them into an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)
X<Abstract Syntax Tree;Parrot Abstract Syntax Tree;AST;PAST>
which is converted by PCT into PIR for compiling and execution.
The PIR implementation of these AST trees and nodes is called the
Parrot Abstract Syntax Tree (PAST).

=back

=head2 C<make_language_shell.pl>

The Parrot repository contains a number of helpful utilities for doing
some common development and building tasks with Parrot. These utlities
are all currently written in Perl 5, although in future releases the
majority will likely be built in Perl 6 and run on Parrot directly. This
is a bootstrapping problem that the developers have not tackled yet.

One of the tools of use to new compiler designers and language implementers
is C<make_language_shell.pl>. C<make_language_shell.pl> is a tool for
automatically creating all the necessary stub files for creating a new
compiler for Parrot. It generates the driver file, parser grammar and
actions files, builtin functions stub file, makefile, and test harness.
All of these are demonstrative stubs and wil obviously need to be
edited furiously or even completely overwritten, but they give a good idea
of what is needed to start on development of the compiler.

C<make_language_shell.pl> is designed to be run from within the Parrot
repository file structure. It creates a subfolder in C</languages/>
with the name of your new language implementation. Typically a new
implementation of an existing language is not simply named after the
language, but is given some other descriptive name to let users know it
is only one implementation available. Consider the way Perl 5 distributions
are named things like "Active Perl" or "Strawberry Perl", or how Python
distributions might be "IronPython" or "VPython". If, on the other hand,
you are implementing an entirely new language, you don't need to give it
a fancy distribution name.

=head2 Parsing Fundamentals

Compilers typically consist of three components: The lexical analyzer,
the parser, and the code generator. The lexical analyzer converts the
HLL input file into individual tokens. A token may consist of an
individual punctuation mark("+"), an indentifier ("myVar"), or a keyword
("while"), or any other artifact that cannot be sensibly broken down.
The parser takes a stream of these input tokens, and attempts to match
them against a given pattern, or grammar. The matching process orders
the input tokens into an abstract syntax tree (AST), which is a form that
the computer can easily work with. This AST is passed to the code
generator which converts it into code of the target language. For
something like the GCC C compiler, the target language is machine code.
For PCT and Parrot, the target language is PIR and PBC.

Parsers come in two general varieties: Top-down and bottom-up. Top-down
parsers start with a top-level rule, a rule which is supposed to
represent the entire input. It attempts to match various combination of
subrules until the entire input is matched. Bottom-down parsers, on the
other hand, start with individual tokens from the lexical analyzer and
attempt to combine them together into larger and larger patterns until
they produce a top-level token.

PGE itself is a top-down parser, although it also contains a bottom-up
I<operator precidence> parser, for things like mathematical expressions
where bottom-up methods are more efficient. We'll discuss both, and the
methods for switching between the two, throughout this chapter.

=head1 Driver Programs

The driver program for the new compiler must create instances of the
various necessary classes that run the parser. It must also include
the standard function libraries, create global variables, and handle
commandline options. Most commandline options are handled by PCT, but
there are some behaviors that the driver program will want to
override.

PCT programs can, by default, be run in two ways: Interactive mode,
which is run one statement at a time in the console, and file mode which
loads and runs an entire file. For interactive mode, it is necessary
to specify information about the prompt that's used and the environment
that's expected. Help and error messages need to be written for the user
too. 

=head2 C<HLLCompiler> class


=head1 Parrot Grammar Engine

The Parrot Grammar Engine X<Parrot Grammar Engine;PGE> is an
implementation of the Perl 6 grammar syntax in Parrot. The grammar
engine in Perl 6 is much more advanced and flexible then the regular
expression syntax of Perl 5. Since most other languages who implement
regular expressions use a copy (or a subset) of Perl 5's regular
expressions, PGE is much more powerful then those too.

PGE uses a recursive descent algorithm N<it also uses an operator
precedence parser, when you ask it nicely>which should be very familar
to users of the Perl 5 module C<Parse::RecDescent>. In fact, both were
originally designed by the same developer, Damian Conway. Recursive
Descent, for those who get into the algorithmic details, is a top-down
parsing algorithm, unlike the bottom-up LALR algorithm used in parser-
generators like Yacc and Bison. Most programmers won't notice the
difference between the two for most applications, although there are
some specific places where the behavior will be different.

=head2 Rules and Actions

A recursive descent parser, like the one used in PGE, is a top-down
parser. This means it attempts to start at the highest-level rule and
work it's way down to the individual input tokens in order to match
the given input. Once the parser has matched the entire input N<a
source code file, or a line of input at the terminal in interactive
mode> the parse is considered successful and the generated AST is
delivered to the code generator for conversion into PIR.

The parser is formed by creating a I<grammar>. Grammars consist of
three primary components: rules, tokens, and protoregexes.

=over 4

=item* Rules

Rules are the most basic grammar element. Rules may call subrules and
may also contain arbitrary whitespace, which is ignored.

=item* Tokens

Tokens represent basic regular expressions. They may not call subrules
and whitespace is treated literally. {{I don't think this is right, but
I'm adding it here anyway as a placeholder -- Whiteknight}}

=item* Protoregex

A protoregex is like a rule or a token, except it can be overloaded
dynamically.

=back

When a rule matches a sequence of input tokens, an associated method
in NQP is called to convert that match into an AST node. This node
is then inserted into the I<parse tree>.

=head2 Basic Rules

Let's start off with a simple rule:

 rule persons_name {
    <first_name> <last_name>
 }

We also define the two name tokens as:

 token first_name { <alpha>+ }
 token last_name { <alpha>+ }

The special token C<< <alpha> >> is a built-in construct that only
accepts upper case and lower case letters. The "+" after the
C<< <alpha> >> tag is a short way of saying "one or more". Our rule
C<persons_name> would match something like C<Darth Vader> N<Actually,
it matches a lot of things that aren't people's names>but wouldn't
match something like C<C 3P0>. Notice that the rule above would match
C<Jar Jar Binks>, but not the way you would expect: It would match the
first "Jar" as C<< <first_name> >> and the second "Jar" as
C<< <last_name> >> and wouldn't match "Binks" at all.

In PGE. The top-level rule which starts the match process and must
successfully match in order for the compiler to continue is always
called C<TOP>. Without a TOP rule, your compiler won't do anything
N<Actually, it will print out an error saying that you have no
TOP rule, and then it will exit, but that isn't anything that we
would want it to do>.

Here's an example TOP rule that uses our definition for
C<< <persons_name> >> above and matches a file that contains a comma-
separated list of names:

 rule TOP {
    [ <persons_name> ',' ]*
 }

this example shows another new construct, the square brackets. Square
brackets are ways to group things together. The star at the end means
that we take all the things inside the brackets zero or more times.
This is similar to the plus, except the plus matches one or more times.
Notice, however, that the above rule always matches a comma at the end,
so we would need to have something like:

 Darth Vader, Luke Skywalker,

Instead of something more natural like:

 Darth Vader, Luke Skywalker

We can modify the rule a little bit so that it always ends with a name
instead of a comma:

 rule TOP {
    [ <persons_name> ',' ]* <persons_name>
 }

Now we don't need a trailing comma, but at the same time we can't match
an empty file because it always expects to have at least one name at the
end. If we still want to match empty files successfully, we need to make
the whole rule optional:

 rule TOP {
    [ [ <persons_name> ',' ]* <persons_name> ]?
 }

We've grouped the whole rule together in another set of brackets, and
put a "?" question mark at the end. The question mark means zero or
one of the prior item.

The symbols "*" (zero or more), "+" (one or more) and "?" are called
I<quantifiers>, and allow an item in the rule to match a variable
number of times. These aren't the only quantifiers, but they are the
most common. We will talk about other quantifiers later on.

=head2 Calling Actions

We haven't covered actions yet, but it's still important now to talk
about how we will call them when we are ready. We call an action
by inserting the C<{*}> token into the rule. When the C<{*}> rule is
encountered, PGE calls the associated action method with the current
match object as an argument. Let's take our C<persons_name> rule
from above, and sprinkle liberally with action calls:

 rule persons_name {
    {*} <first_name> {*} <last_name> {*}
 }

The first call to the action method contains an empty match object
because the parser hasn't had a chance to match anything yet. The
second call contains only the first name of the match. The third and
final call contains both the matched first and last name. Notice that
if the match fails halfway through, we still call the actions where
we succeeded, but do not call the actions after the failure. So, if
we try to match the string "Leia", the action is called before the
name and after the first name. When the rule tries to match the last
name, it fails because no last name is provided, and the third action
method call is never made.

=head2 Alternations and Keys

In addition to sub-rules, groups, and quantifiers, we also are able to
take alternations between options that are either-or. The vertical bar
token "|" can be used to distinguish between options where only one
may match, Here's an example:

 rule hero {
    ['Luke' | 'Leia'] 'Skywalker'
 }

This rule will match either "Luke Skywalker" or "Leia Skywalker" but
won't match "Luke Leia Skywalker" N<or anything else, for that matter>.
With things like alternations, if we want to call an action method it's
helpful to distinguish which combination we matched:

 rule hero {
    [
      'Luke' {*}    #= Luke
    | 'Leia' {*}    #= Leia
    ]
    'Skywalker'
 }

This is the same rule, except now it passes two arguments to it's
action method: the match object and the name of the person who
got matched.

=head2 Warning: Left Recursion

Getting into all the nitty-gritty theory behind parsers is well beyond
the scope of this book. However, there is one potential pitfall that
developers should be made aware of that is not immediately obvious.
Like functions in ordinary procedural or functional languages, the
methods in the PGE parser grammar can call themselves recursively.
Consider the following rules derived in part from the grammar for the
C programming language:

 rule if_statement {
    'if' <condition> '{' <statement>* '}' <else_block>?
 }

 rule statement {
    <if_statement> | <expression>
 }

 rule else_block {
    'else' '{' <statements>* '}'
 }

Notice that an C<if_statement> can contain a list of C<statement>s, and
that each statement may itself be an C<if_statement>? This is called
I<recursion> X<Recursion>, and is part of where the "Recursive Descent"
algorithm gets it's name from.

Now, let's look at a more direct example of a comma-separated list of
integer digits to form an array. We can define this recursively as
follows:

 rule list {
     <list> ',' <digit> | <digit>
 }

The intention is that if there is only one digit, we match the second
option in the alternation, and if there are more digits we can match
them recursively in the first alternation. However, take a close look
at the insideous result. The recursive descent parser enters the C<list>
rule. It's first option is to enter the list rule again, so it does.
Recursive descent is a depth-first algorithm, and it will continue to
descent down a particular path until it finds a successful match or a
match failure. In this case, it matches C<list> and then it matches
C<list> again, then it matches C<list> again, and so on and so forth.
What we have created is an infinite loop pattern called I<left recursion>.

Left recursion is caused when the left-most item of the left-most
alternation is a recursion. The rule above can be easily resolved
by writing:

 rule list {
    <digit> | <list> ',' <digit>
 }

Or even

 rule list {
    <digit> ',' <list> | <digit>
 }

Both of these two options make sure the left-most item in our rule is not
a recursion, therefore preventing left recursion.

Here is a more tricky example where the left recursion is hidden from
view:

 rule term {
    <expression> '*' <term> | <digit>
 }

 rule expression {
    <term> '+' <expression> | <term>
 }

This is a very limited subset of mathematical equations that we might like
to write, and even in this small subset we have this same problem: To
match a C<term>, the parser first tries to match an C<expression>, which
in turn matches a C<term> and then an C<expression> ...

Left recursion is not the only problem you can run into with a recursive
descent grammar, but it's one that's likely going to come up relatively
often for new language designers, and one that is not always likely to
generate useful error messages.

=head2 Operator Precidence Parser

=head1 Actions and NQP

=head2 NQP Basics

=head2 The Match Object C<$/>

=head2 Making Trees


=cut
