=head1 NAME

PAST::Pattern::Match - the result object from matching a PAST::Pattern.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Any matching operation with a C<PAST::Pattern> produces a C<PAST::Pattern::Match> object. It can be used to determine whether the match was successful, to find the matching node, and to find the results of the child and attribute sub-patterns.

=head1 PAST::Pattern::Match is Capture

=head2 Sub-pattern result objects

Some C<PAST::Pattern> subclasses allow supplying child or attribute sub-patterns. When matching these patterns, the C<PAST::Pattern::Match> result object can be used to access the results of the sub-patterns.

The results of child sub-patterns are accessible through array indexing on the result object. The result of the first child sub-pattern of the pattern will be C<match_result[0]>, the result of the second will be C<match_result[1]>, and so on.

The results of attribute sub-patterns are accessible through hash indexing on the result object. The result of the "foo" attribute sub-pattern will be C<match_result['foo']>, for example. In NQP, these can also be accessed using the I<$<foo>> syntax if the C<PAST::Pattern::Match> object is bound to I<$/>.

=head2 Attributes

=over 4

=item I<$!success>

1 if the match succeeded, otherwise 0.
It can be accessed or set with the C<success([I<value>])> method.

=item I<$!ast>

An "abstract object" that has been associated with the C<PAST::Pattern::Match> object. It can be accessed with the C<ast()> method. It can be set with the C<!make(I<ast>)>, or using the C<make> statement in NQP if the C<PAST::Pattern::Match> object is bound to I<$/>.

=item I<$!from>

Contains the matching node(or other value). It can be accessed or set with the C<from([I<value>])> method.

=back

=head2 Methods

=over 4

=item C<new([I<success>, [I<from>]])>

Creates a new C<PAST::Pattern::Match> object with the I<$!success> and I<$!from> attributes set to the values of I<success> and I<from>, if provided.

=item C<Bool()>

Converts the PAST::Pattern::Match object to a boolean by producing the I<$!success> attribute.

=item C<ast()>

Returns the value of the I<$!ast> attribute.

=item C<!make(I<ast>)>

Sets the value of the I<$!ast> attribute to I<ast>. In NQP, if I<$/> is a C<PAST::Pattern::Match> object, C<make I<foo>> is equivalent to C<$/."!make"(I<foo>)>.

=item C<from([I<from>])>

If I<from> is provide, sets the I<$!from> attribute to I<from>. Otherwise, returns the value of the I<$!from> attribute.

=item C<success([I<success>])>

If I<success> is provide, sets the I<$!success> attribute to I<success>. Otherwise, returns the value of the I<$!success> attribute.

=back

=head2 Vtables

=over 4

=item C<INTVAL get_bool()>

Returns 1 if the match succeeded, 0 otherwise.

=back

=cut
