=head1 Building 

This document describes the process of building the .NET CLI to PIR translator.


=head2 Requirements
To build the translator you will need the following:-

=over 4

=item * A C compiler, linker, make tool and Perl 5. If you have built Parrot
before, you will already have all of these.

=item * ICU (International Components For Unicode), so Parrot can handle the
UTF-16 strings used by .NET. Parrot must be built with ICU support.

=item * A built Parrot source tree. The Parrot source, available from SVN as
well as a number of release builds, can be located at the Parrot webstie
(L<http://www.parrotcode.org/>.

=item * For running the regression tests and translating any vaguely real
world programs (as in, ones that use the .NET class library), Mono
(L<http://www.go-mono.com/>). This is an open source implementation of the
.NET runtime, class libraries and compilers.

=item * pod2html for generating HTML documentation (usually installed with
Perl).

=back


=head2 Building

Enter the source directory for the translator and run Configure.pl, passing it
the path to your built Parrot source tree.

  perl Configure.pl --parrot ../parrot

This will generate a makefile. To build the translator using the makefile, type
the name of the make program for your platform, which will likely be one of the
following:

  make

Or

  nmake


=head2 Running The Tests
Run the regression tests like this:

  make test

Replacing make with the name of your make program, as used when building.

