# $Id$

=head1 The Translator Builder

The subsystem that translates the .NET instruction stream into a stream of 
Parrot instructions is not written directly in PIR, but instead is generated
from a rules file, as described in L<rulesfile.pod>, by the translator builder
in conjunction with a particular stack to register mapping module. The idea
behind this is to seperate the concerns of instruction mapping, walking the
instruction stream and stack to register mapping. Writing this directly in
PIR would be error prone and would make it more difficult to try out different
stack to register mapping schemes or optimize the instruction translation
code lookup.

=head2 Generating Code That...Generates Code

The translator builder is generating the code that will translate .NET CLI
instructions into Parrot instructions. That code in turn is also generating
code. The key to hacking on this part of the system is keeping a firm hold
on what code is being talked about - the code of the instruction translator
or the code that the instruction translator will generate.

=head2 Usage

The translator builder is invoked as follows:-

  perl build/translator.pl src/translation.rules --srm Stack --ouptput src/it.pir

Where translation.rules is the input translation rules file, Stack is the
stack to register mapping algorithm to use and src/it.pir is the output
PIR file to generate.

=head2 Steps

=head3 Rules File Parsing

The first simple task carried out by the translator builder is parsing the
translation rules file and placing its contents in a data structure that
allows easy access to the data for each rule.

=head3 Load A Stack To Register Mapper

Next, a stack to register mapping module must be loaded, as specified in the
command line arguments to the script. These all adhere to a standard interface
as defined in SRM::Base, and indeed inhreit from SRM::Base. These modules are
used to provide ways of turning stack based code into register based code and
by being modules easily allow a number of different mapping algorithms to be
benchmarked.

=head3 Emit Setup PIR

This step emits any PIR that sets things up for instruction translation. This
includes giving the stack to register mapper a chance to emit any code that it
would like to.

=head3 Build Dispatch Code

It is desirable to be able to dispatch to the translation code for a particular
instruction efficiently. This step emits PIR code that does this. The lookup
will happen in a number of steps O(log n) where n is the number of instructions
we know how to translate.

=head3 Build Rule Translation Code

This step generates the code for each rule. With support from the register
mapping module it substitures metavariables for named or numbered Parrot
registers. The register mapping module also takes care of inserting labels.
This section has a lot of hooks into the stack to register mapping module,
some dependent on the type of instruction being translated. More below.

=head3 Emit Trailing PIR

Once translation has taken place, the stack to register mapping code may
wish to perform some cleanup, so there is a hook for it to do so. Also,
the end of the translate routine that returns the generated PIR needs to
be generated.

=head2 Data Flow To Determine Register Types

The .NET CLR needs to keep track of the types of items on the stack. For
example, the add instruction is expected to handle both integer addition
and floating point addition and thus the types of the items on the stack
that will be added together need to be known so the operation can be
carried out correctly. The .NET specification lays down restrictions that
ensure that this can be determined statically.

Parrot works somewhat differently; registers and floating point numbers go
in a different set of registers. This means that Parrot does not have the
cost of determining what behaviour will be required at runtime. (This is
a result of .NET being designed to assume a JIT will be present and Parrot
trying to ensure that a high performance interpreter is possible).

This means that the translator needs to use data flow analysis to determine
the types of Parrot registers that should be used to hold the data that is
being operated on. This is discussed in .NET terms as determining the stack
type state. There are three cases to consider.

=over 4

=item * Loads - here type data is added to the stack type state.

=item * Stores - here type data is removed from the stack type state.

=item * Operations - here type data may be transformed, but based on existing
data already in the stack type state rather than external type information.

=back

A type will be represented as a type describing hash, which is a Hash PMC with
the following fields:

=over 4

=item * type - corresponds to one of the constants in the .NET Specification Partition II Section 22.1.15.

=item * byref - set if the byref flag is set on the type.

=item * token - for some values of type a token is also expected; it is stored in this entry.

=item * reg_type_short - The Parrot register type that the type is stored in,

represented as a single letter I, N, S or P. This does not need to be set by
any code that instantiates a new type describing hash, but will be available
in existing ones. The routine "annotate_reg_type" is responsible for making
this entry.

=item * reg_type_long - The Parrot register type that the type is stored in,
one of "int", "num", "string" or "pmc". This does not need to be set by any
code that instantiates a new type describing hash, but will be available in
existing ones. The routine "annotate_reg_type" is responsible for making this
entry.

=back

The rules file provides the "typeinfo" entry for load op and call class rules
that specifies PIR code that sets values in ${DTYPES} (for ops) or ${LOADTYPE}
(for loads). It is up to the translator builder to ensure that ${DTYPES} is
set up as an array of the correct size and that ${STYPES} is maintained. (Note
that this becomes a little trickier with calling, when the number of entries
to pop of ${STYPES} is unknown until runtime. Only a little tricker though.)


=head2 Generating Instruction Translation Code

This section of the document describes the steps that the translator
generator takes when builder the translator for each instruction type.

=head3 Operations (op class instructions)

1. The destination types must be computed. ${DTYPES} will be an array of
type describing hashes and used to determine register names in the SRM.

2. The pre_op SRM method is called to generate translator code that will
assign to the meta-variables ${STACK0} to ${STACKn), where n is the number
of stack locations that the operations pops off to use, and also to the
meta-variables ${DEST0} to ${DESTm}, where m is the number of values that
are pushed onto the stack after the compuation. Both n and m are passed.

2. If an "instruction" entry has been supplied in the rules file then code
to emit this instruction will be inserted into the translator, with the
meta-variables substituted as needed. If a PIR entry is supplied then it
have meta-variables substituted and then be inserted directly into the
translator.

3. The post_op SRM method is called. This does any post-op tasks. For
example, if a real stack is being maintained in user code and ${DESTm}
were just temporary registers, then these values will need to be pushed
onto the real stack. Note that n and m are passed, as in step 2.

=head3 Loads (load class instructions)

1. A load instruction must provide as part of its translation rule a
chunk of code that assigns to the meta-variable ${LOADTYPE} a type
describing hash for the type of data that the load is placing on the
stack. This code will be emitted into the translator first.

2. The translator builder looks at whether or not ${DEST0} is used,
meaning that a register is needed to store the loaded value in, or
${LOADREG} is used, meaning that the value being loaded is already in a
register (e.g. in the case of a local or an argument). In the first case,
let NEED_DEST = 1, in the second case let NEED_DEST = 0. We provide both
of these mechanisms to give the SRM chance to optimize away useless data
movement.

3. The pre_load SRM method is called, passing the NEED_DEST flag and adding
any PIR that is generated to the translator.

4. Emit the translation code as supplied by the pir entry of the load rule.

5. The post_load SRM method is called, passing the NEED_DEST flag and adding
any PIR that is generated to the translaotr.

=head3 Stores (store class instructions)

1. The translator builder looks at whether or not ${STOREREG} is assigned to
in the PIR that is produced. If this is the case let DEST_REG = 1 otherwise
let DEST_REG = 0. In the case where ${STOREREG} is used, the destination for
storage is a register and the SRM can produce more optimal code by knowing
this. When DEST_REG = 0 then ${STACK0} is set to the name of a register
holding the value being popped off the top of the stack to be stored.

2. The pre_store SRM method is called, passing the DEST_REG flag and adding
any PIR that is generated to the translator.

3. Emit the translation code as supplied by the pir entry of the store rule.

4. The post_store SRM method is called, passing the DEST_REG flag and adding
any PIR that is generated to the translator.

=head3 Branches (branch class instructions)

1. The pre_branch SRM method is called to generate translator code that will
assign to the meta-variables ${STACK0} to ${STACKn), where n is the number
of stack locations that the branch instruction pops off to use. Note that for
unconditional branches then n = 0. The value n is passed and any PIR that is
generated is added to the translator.

2. Emit the translation code as supplied by the pir entry of the branch rule.

3. The post_branch SRM method is called, passing the pop count as was passed to
pre_branch and adding any PIR that is generated to the translator.

=head3 Calling (calling class instructions)

1. A calling translation rule may supply code that will optionally compute a
single destination type and store it in ${DTYPES}[0]. In the case where no
result will be pushed onto the stack (for example, when returning or when a
void method is invoked) then ${DTYPES}[0] should not be assigned to - not
even a null value.

2. The pre_call SRM method is called. As there is no way to know how many
values may need to be popped off the stack until translation time, the stack
meta-variables are unhelpful here. Therefore this method must place a list of
registers, as many as are needed for the call or return, into the array that
has been set up in ${PARAMS}. (Params may be seen as a mis-leading name when
returning, but given Parrot uses continuation passing scheme a call and a
return look very similar anyway, so it feels kinda natural from a Parrot point
of view, if not a .NET one.)

3. Emit the translation code as supplied by the pir entry of the call rule.

4. The post_call SRM method is called.

=head2 Stack to Register Mapping (SRM) Modules

=head3 Having An Appropriate Relationship With Data Flow Analysis

The SRM modules have a rather intimate relationship with the data flow anlysis
that determines the types of items on the stack. As in real life, getting too
intimate often makes for trouble. Therefore the following rules should always
be obeyed.

1. Look but don't touch. That is, look at the type hashes in the stack types
array and get whatever data is needed from them. Never modify the data in the
type hashes or remove a type hash from an array of type hashes. Doing so is
like cheating on the translator builder, which inserts all the code that is
needed to handle data flow analysis information.

2. Don't look at things that aren't available. The three arrays of type
hashes that will usually be available (unless it's stated they are not) are
${STYPES} - the types of items on the stack, ${LTYPES} - the types of local
variables and ${PTYPES} - the types of parameters passed to the method that
the translator is translating. Availability of anything else should not be
assumed unless the specification for the SRM method in question says otherwise.

=head3 pre_translation()

The PIR returned by this method will be placed near the start of the translator
so that it runs before instruction translation begins. This will usually be setup
code for the stack to register mapper.

Only ${LTYPES} and ${PTYPES} will be available in this method.

=head3 post_translation()

The PIR returned by this method will be placed near the end of the translator so
that is is run after the instruction translation has been completed. Parrot's GC
probably eliminates the need to clean up any data structures, but this method is
here just in case some tear-down needs to be performed.

Only ${LTYPES} and ${PTYPES} will be available in this method.

=head3 subs()

A stack to register mapper may wish to provide a number of subroutines that are
used in the mapping process. PIR returned by this method will be inserted outside
of the instruction translation sub. Therefore, no meta-variables are available.

=head3 gen_label()

Label generation is given to the stack to register mapping module as one of its
tasks. Why? Because the SRM is likely to need to know about basic blocks as
this knowledge is needed by most stack to register mapping algorithms. In the
case that the stack to register mapping algorithm doesn't know, a default
implementation of this method is provided that emits a label for every 
instruction whether or not it is named as a branch target.

Meta-variables are available to this method, however the only one that is
likely to be needed is ${PC}, the program counter.

If a label is being generated then it must be of the form "LABn:" where n
is the program counter held when that instruction is reached.

=head3 pre_op(POP_COUNT, PUSH_COUNT)

This will be called to generate code that precedes the code to translate an
instruction that only operates on values on the top of the stack. This is
always modelled as popping the registers off the stack, doing the compuation
and pushing the results back on the top of the stack. The code generated by
pre_op relates to the pop phase, but must produce register names for both the
items being popped off the stack and the items being pushed onto the stack. 

The count of values that are popped off the top of the stack is passed in as
POP_COUNT. The count of values that are pushed onto the top of the stack is
passed in as PUSH_COUNT.

For a POP_COUNT value of n the PIR returned must assign the meta-variables STACK0
to STACKn with the names of registers holding the popped values. Under some SRM
schemes this may involve actually popping the data from a stack being maintained
by the translated instruction stream. Under others it may involve just popping the
name from a stack that the translator is maintaining as the values are already in
registers in the generated code.

For a PUSH_COUNT value of m the PIR returned must assign the meta-variables DEST0
to DESTm with the names of registers that will hold the values being pushed. Under
some SRM schemes these may correspond to the final destination of the values, e.g.
if stack locations are being mapped onto registers. In other cases they may be
temporary storage locations that will be pushed onto the stack in post_op.

Note that register name compuations will likely involve the ${STYPES} and ${DTYPES}
meta-variables, which contain the types of values currently on the stack and the
computed types of the values to be pushed onto the stack computed using data flow
analysis.

=head3 post_op(POP_COUNT, PUSH_COUNT)

This will be called to generate code that follows the code to translate an
instruction that only operates on values on the top of the stack. This is
always modelled as popping the registers off the stack, doing the compuation
and pushing a single result back on the top of the stack if needed. The code
generated by post_op relates to the push phase.

The count of values that are popped off the top of the stack is passed in as
POP_COUNT. The count of values that are pushed onto the top of the stack is
passed in as PUSH_COUNT.

There are no requirements on the PIR returend to set any meta-variables. In
some SRM algorithms there may be nothing to do in post_op. In ones that are
maintaining a real stack under the hood, however, this is a chance for values
stored in temporary result registers to be pushed onto the real stack that is
being maintained.

Again, the ${DTYPES} meta-variable for the array of destination type hashes is
available.

=head3 pre_load(NEED_DEST)

This is called to generate code that precedes the translation code for a load
instruction. It comes after the type of the item being loaded has been stored
as a type describing hash in ${LOADTYPE} so that this data is available.

If NEED_DEST is set then the PIR that is returend must assign to ${DEST0} the
name of a register that will be used to store the loaded value. This may be a
temporary that will be pushed onto the stack in post_load or it may be a
register that is mapped to a particular stack location, depending on the SRM
algorithm.

If NEED_DEST is not set then there are no need to assign to any meta-variables.

=head3 post_load(NEED_DEST)

This is called to generate code that follows the the translation code for a load
instruction.

If NEED_DEST is set then the value being loaded will now be in the register named
in ${DEST0}. If NEED_DEST is not set then the register holding the value being
loaded is stored in ${LOADREG}.

There are no requirements on this method to set any meta-variables. As in
pre_load, ${LOADTYPE} will be available.

=head3 pre_store(DEST_REG)

This is called to generate code that precedes the translation code for a store
instruction.

If DEST_REG is set then this means that the destination of the store will be a
register, though at this time the name of the register is *not* available. The
purpose of the translation code is to produce the name of that register, but not
to copy the value to it. This will need to be done in post_store.

If DEST_REG is not set this means that the destination of the store will not be
a register. This means that the translation code will need to do something more
advanced and will be storing the value itself. Therefore, it needs access to the
value, meaning that this method must assign the name of a register holding the
value to ${STACK0} and cause the translator to emit any code needed to place the
value in that register.

=head3 post_store(DEST_REG)

This is called to generate code that follows the translation code for a store
instruction.

If DEST_REG is set then this means that the destination of the store will be the
register named in ${STOREREG}. The translation code does not copy the value to
this location, so this SRM method must return PIR that emits translated code that
does this copy operation. The reason behind this is to provide opportunities for
optimizing away useless operations. Taking advantage of these is down to the SRM
module.

If DEST_REG is not set this means that the destination of the store was not a
register. Furthermore, the store will now have been completed. In this case, this
method may have little or nothing to do.

=head3 pre_branch(POP_COUNT)

This is called to generate code that precedes the translation code for a branch
instruction. The branch operation may involve values stored on the top of the
stack. The count of values that are popped off the top of the stack by the branch
is passed in as POP_COUNT.

For a POP_COUNT value of n the PIR returned must assign the meta-variables STACK0
to STACKn with the names of registers holding the popped values. Under some SRM
schemes this may involve actually popping the data from a stack being maintained
by the translated instruction stream. Under others it may involve just popping the
name from a stack that the translator is maintaining as the values are already in
registers in the generated code.

=head3 post_branch(POP_COUNT)

This is called to generate code that follows the translation code for a branch
instruction. As with pre_branch, the number of values that the branch instruction
takes from the stack top is available in POP_COUNT.

This method has no requirements on setting meta-variables.

=head3 pre_call

This is called to generate code that precedes the translation code for a
calling related instruction (either a method call or a return). It needs to
put names of registers that contain the parameters to pass or return into
the ${PARAMS} array, first parameter as the first element, etc. It will be
able to achieve this by looking at the argument to the opcode, which will
refer to the method signature.

In addition, if ${DTYPES} has an element, the destination register (for the
result of the call) must be set in ${DEST0}.

=head3 post_call

This is called to generate code that follows the translation code for a
calling instruction. This could be used, for example, to put a returned
value back onto the stack.

