# -*- cperl -*-
#

=head1 TITLE

Array base class

=head1 ABSTRACT

This pod file documents the Array base class usage. For implementation
details you should look inside the class file, found at
C<classes/array.pmc> in the parrot source code.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  new P0, .Array    # initialize P0 as an array

  set I0, P0        # set I0 to the size of the array in P0
  set P0, 2         # set the size of the array in P0 to 2

  set P0[0], "foo"  # put "foo" into the array at position 0
  set I1, P0[1]     # get an integer value from the entry 
                    # at array position 1

  defined I2, P0[1] # is the value at position 1 defined?
  exists  I3, P0[0] # is there an element at position 0?

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=head2 Creation

As with any other PMC, the following line creates an array PMC in register 
C<P0>:

  new P0, .Array

=head2 Array sizes

You can retrieve the size of the array using

  set I0, P0

This will put the size of the array in register C<P0> into C<I0>. In the
same way, assigning an integer directly to the array sets the size of the 
array. For instance: 

  new P0, .Array
  set P0, 2

creates a new Array (with default size 0) and then expands the size of the 
array to two.

Arrays do not automatically resize themselves when you access out-of-bounds
elements. This means that you must remember to size an Array appropriately
before storing anything in it.

=head2 Accessing elements

Elements are accessed using indexes, as in any programming language. 

The following code initializes an array in C<P0> with size two, and
sets the first position to the integer C<-8> and second position to
the floating point number C<3.1415>.

  new P0, .Array
  set P0, 2

  set P0[0], -8
  set P0[1], 3.1415

You can also assign directly from registers; for instance:

  new P0, .Array
  set P0, 2

  set I0, -8
  set N0, 3.1415

  set P0[0], I0
  set P0[1], N0

leaves P0 in the same state as in the previous code snippet. 

To retrieve elements, we use the same syntax: 

  set N1, P0[1]
  set I1, P0[0]

Those two lines retrieve the values from the array back into registers.

The value stored at a given position is not fixed; it can be
changed simply by assigning a new value:

  set P0[1], "A string"

Accessing an out-of-bounds array element raises an exception; if you want
an Array that will automatically resize, then use a C<PerlArray>.

You can test if there is a defined element at an array position by using

  defined I0, P0[1]

for the position you want to test. On the other hand, if you only want to
test whether a given element exists (rather than whether it is defined), 
then use the C<exists> op instead:

  exists I0, P0[0]

=head2 TODO

Explain a little more which exception will be raised in case you
access a out-of-bounds index on the array (as soon we have
exceptions).

=cut
