=head1 Translating Method Calls

This document discusses .NET method calling and how this is translated to work
on Parrot.


=head2 The .NET Model
The .NET CLI provides a stack based calling mechanism. Arguments are pushed
onto the stack left to right, then the method is called. If there is a return
value then it is left on the stack. Suckfully, methods are limited to 
returning a single value.

The method to call is given as a parameter to the call instructions (apart
from calli, which calls through a method reference; here the signature is
provided with the instruction). The method to call is specified by a 4-byte
integer that points into the meta-data table. Note that if a virtual call is
taking place then a method of the same name and signature may be called in
place of the specific method the token refers to, depending what is in the
v-table.

.NET does support having methods of the same name with different signatures,
however the VM does not "support" this at call-time. It is up to the compiler
to resolve which method to call and put the correct meta-data reference with
the call.


=head2 The Parrot Model
Parrot provides standard calling conventions that attempt to cover the needs
of many languages. They use Continuation Passing Style and under the hood are
implemented as several variable argument register instructions (set_args,
get_params, set_results and get_returns). Both positional and named parameters
are supported with required and slurply support for both, subject to some
ordering constraints (positional before named, required before slurpy).

Parrot also provides a multi-method dispatch mechanism. This is used to call
methods with the same name but varying signatures. As Parrot supports dynamic
languages, the method that will be called can not be determined at compile
time and may change throughout the lifetime of the program as new methods
appear and inheritance hierachies change. A cache is used to aid performance.
In fact, in run cores that are capable of it the instruction stream is modified
at runtime to just have a call to the method that the dispatch algorithm found,
so the cost of the dynamic dispatch is amortised. This technique is known as a
Polymorhpic Inline Cache (PIC).


=head2 The Translated Code Will Use Parrot Calling Conventions
The .NET method calls will be translated in a way that uses the Parrot calling
conventions. This will without doubt mean that calling times will be higher,
for the Parrot calling conventions are far more complex than the .NET ones.
However, not using the Parrot calling conventions would create difficulties
in calling methods on .NET classes and objects from other languages that
target Parrot. More bluntly, as the entire point of writing this translator is
interoperability, not targetting the Parrot calling conventions would be
pretty dumb.


=head2 Translating Method Calls

=head3 The "call" Instruction
The "call" instruction does a non-virtual method call; the method specified by
the meta-data token referenced by the instruction is the one to, no matter
what. This can be achieved in Parrot by looking up the method in the namespace
holding the class it is exists in, which can be determined from the meta-data
token.

Assuming that $P1 and $I2 contain the parameters to be passed and $I0 is to
hold the return value, then a call to the method "factorial" in the class
"Test" in the namespace "Testing" will translate to Parrot instructions as
shown below.

  $P1000000 = find_global "Testing.Test", "factorial"
  $I0 = $P1000000($P1, $I2)


=head3 The "callvirt" Instruction
The "callvirt" instruction does a virtual method call. That is, an object
currently viewed as being an A that is actually some subtype B of A may
override some method "foo". Whereas "call" would call the method "foo" as
defined by the class A, callvirt uses the runtime type of the object to decide
what method to call. This can be translated directly to Parrot method call
syntax.

  $I0 = $P1."foo"($I2)


=head3 The "calli" Instruction
The "calli" instruction does a method call through a method reference. Another
instruction is used to load a function reference. As shown in the example PIR
for the "call" instruction, Parrot can handle storing a reference to a method
in a PMC. This has not, however, been implemented at this time.


=head2 Supporting Method Overloading
Using Parrot's MMD mechanism will provide most of what is required to support
.NET method overloading. However, there is a problem: Parrot does not recognize
different types of integers and floating point numbers as fundemental types
like .NET does. For efficiency it is desirable to have, for example, both
32-bit and 16-bit integers stored in Integer registers, but at dispatch time
Parrot will be unable to distinguish between the two types.

A number of options exist to solve this. Name mangling the subs and then using
the signature to generate the mangled name when translating the call would
work. This avoids Parrot's MMD completely, meaning it is cheaper at runtime
and that the intended method is always called. However, this really hurts
interoperability with other languages.

Another option is to wrap up anything other than a native integer or double
into a PMC type at call time - essentially boxing it - and then unboxing it
inside the call. This allows the MMD system in Parrot to be used, avoids name
mangling the methods so other languages can still see and call them as desired
but makes calling more costly.

Since the goal of the project is interoperability rather than performance, the
second option makes more sense. It is implemented by declaring a number of
classes that derive either from Parrot's built in Integer or Float PMCs and
named "@@DOTNET_MMDBOX_I1" for the single byte signed integer, etc. When
translating a calling related instruction, code must be emitted to place any
types that must be boxed for MMD purposes into the appropriate box type. All
methods are annotated with ":multi(...)" directives using name of the boxed
types where appropriate. Note that there is no need for explicit unboxing on
the callee side; if an integer register is declared but a PMC is passed, then
the get_integer v-table method will be called on that PMC automatically.


=head2 References
PIC - http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/hlzle91optimizing.html












