# Copyright (C) 2011, Parrot Foundation

=pod

=head1 NAME

docs/mans/vmspec/README.pod - Readme file to the Parrot Virtual Machine 
Specification. 

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This README sets out a brief overview of the Parrot Virtual Machine 
Specification.  The purpose of this virtual machine specification is to 
document, clearly, the design of the Parrot virtual machine.  The goals 
of this specification are two-fold:

=over 4

=item * to serve as a reference document for for compiler writers, who wish to 
target the virtual machine, and 

=item * to serve as the definitive source of documentation on the implementation
of a virtual machine.

=back

In order to accomplish these goals, this specification also includes something 
akin to an implementation reference.  That is to say, this specification 
includes -- where appropriate or useful to further elucidate the material under
consideration -- implementation details, to include specific code examples.  
As examples, where this specification addresses certain aspects of Parrot's 
internal structure, it will include relevant snippets of 'C' code with which 
to elucidate the material and where it covers the issue of how to load parrot 
bytecode, it will also include specific code examples, in the 'Winxed' 
programming language, on how to accomplish this feat.

=head2 Organization

Initially, though this is subject to change and to subsequent revision, the
organization of this specification will be as follows:

=over 4

=over 8

=item Preface

=item Table of Contents

=item Chapter  1: Introduction

=item Chapter  2: The Winxed Programming Language Concepts

=item Chapter  3: The Structure of the Parrot Virtual Machine

=item Chapter  4: The bytecode File Format

=item Chapter  5: Loading, Linking, and Initializing 

=item Chapter  6: The Parrot Virtual Machine Instruction Set

=item Chapter  7: Compiling for the Parrot Virtual Machine

=item Chapter  8: The Memory Internals

=item Chapter  9: The Parrot Virtual Machine Threading System

=item Chapter 10: Opcode Mnemonics by Opcode

=item Appendix A: The NQP (Not Quite Perl) Programming Language

=item Appendix B: The Parrot Intermediate Representation Language

=item Glossary

=item Bibliography

=item Index

=back

=back

=head2 Pod

The format of the specification shall be in multiple POD files, each 
reflecting the organization of the specification as set out above, to wit:

=over 4

=over 8

=item preface.pod

=item acknowledgments.pod

=item toc.pod

=item ch01_introduction.pod

=item ch02_winxed_programming_language.pod

=item ch03_structure_of_PVM.pod

=item ch04_parrot_bytecode_format.pod

=item ch05_loading_linking_initializing.pod

=item ch06_PVM_instruction_set.pod

=item ch07_compiling_for_PVM.pod

=item ch08_memory_internals.pod

=item ch09_thread_system.pod

=item ch10_opcode_mnemonics_by_opcode.pod

=item appa_nqp_programming_language.pod

=item appb_PIR_language.pod

=item bibliography.pod

=item glossary.pod

=item index.pod

=back

=back

All of which may readily be converted into various, alternative formats, 
I<e.g.,> html or pdf.

=head2 Notice

Until such time as the Parrot Developer Team formally adopts this 
specification, everything within the specification, to include the contents
of the various pod files, should be considered as I<draft> only.

=head1 LICENSE

The Parrot Virtual Machine Specification is distributed under the same terms 
as Parrot itself.  For more details, I<see> F<LICENSE>, a copy of which is 
contained in the Parrot distribution.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2001-2011, Parrot Foundation.

=cut
