# $Id$

=head1 TITLE

namespaces - Notes on namespaces in PHP

=head1 Namespaces in Pipp

A namespace is introduced with the keyword B<namespace>.
There can be multiple namespaces per file. They are not nested.
Namespaces don't carry over to included files.
B<define()> doesn't define in the current namespace.
The backslash character serves as the namespace separator.
Short names can be defined with B<use>.
Only classes, functions and constants are namespaced.
The current namespace can be queried with B<__NAMESPACE__>.
Namespaces are case insensitive.
No global code can precede the first B<namespace> directive.
Free code is disallowed within namespaces.

=head1 Implementation in Pipp

Currently the namespace directive is only parsed.

In order to ease implementation and testing, there will be
some divergences in Pipp. 
Code before the first namespace directive is allowed.
Free code within namespace is allowed.
There will be namespaced variables as well.
'namespace \;' indicates the return to the root namespace.



=head1 AUTHOR

Bernhard Schmalhofer - <Bernhard.Schmalhofer@gmx.de>

=head1 SEE ALSO

  L<http://docs.php.net/manual/en/language.namespaces.php>
  L<http://wiki.php.net/rfc/namespaces>
  L<http://wiki.php.net/rfc/namespaceseparator>
  L<http://wiki.php.net/rfc/backslashnamespaces>
  L<http://wiki.php.net/rfc/namespacecurlies>
  L<http://wiki.php.net/rfc/namespaceref>
  L<http://inside.webfactory.de/en/blog/php-namespaces-explained.html>
  L<http://marc.info/?l=php-internals&m=121527668606247>
  L<http://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=46304>
  L<http://loveandtheft.org/2008/10/26/set-sail-for-fail-php-namespaces/>

=cut
