# $Id$

=head1 NAME
 
Pipp - Introduction

=head1 What is Pipp?

Pipp aims to be a complete implementation of PHP on Parrot.
In short, Pipp in Parrot's PHP.

=head1 Goals

Implement PHP.
Support well behaving PHP extensions.

A secondary goal is to provide a side by side comparison
of different parsing and tree transformation techniques.

=head1 Divergences of Pipp

=over 4

=item builtin function pipp_defined().

=item Loading of Parrot libs will be supported

=item Support for global variable $INC, list of included files

=cut

=head1 Variants

Therefore there are currently three variants of Pipp:

=over

=item pct       - Parrot compiler toolkit, this is the default

=item phc       - take XML output from phc and munge it with XSLT

=item antlr3    - ANTLR3, converted from languages/bc, started

=back

=head1 Status

No current status available.

=head1 Dependencies

=over

=item phc

xsltproc and phc need to be in PATH.

=item antlr3

ANTLR3 generating Java code.

=back

=head1 Author

Bernhard Schmalhofer - <Bernhard.Schmalhofer@gmx.de>

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item L<http://www.perlfoundation.org/parrot/index.cgi?pipp>

=item L<http://phpcompiler.org/>

=item L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Document_Object_Model>

=item L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree>

=item L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XSLT>

=item L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/parrot/docs/glossary.pod>

=item L<http://perl.overmeer.net/xml-compile/>

=item L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plum-headed_parakeet>

=item L<http://www.parrotcode.org/docs/compiler_tools.html>

=item L<http://www.antlr.org/v3/index.html>

=back

=cut
