# Copyright (C) 2001-2010, Parrot Foundation.

=head1 Make Cover

docs/dev/coverage.pod - Make Cover Documentation.

=head1 Overview

"make cover" is a very useful tool which generates reports on how well tested
parrot code is. The coverage reports are outputted in various formats in
cover_db/ after C<make cover> has run. The final result of make cover is a
listing of parrot's source files and a matching percentage of how well covered
that file is by the tests.

=head1 Dependencies

Obviously, the first step would be to get parrot and build it. See
F<docs/intro.pod> for more information. To run "make cover" you must first
install some Perl tools to aid in the creation of these reports. Make Cover
requires the "Devel::Cover" perl module. If you are running Debian/Ubuntu type
systems you can run

  sudo apt-get install libdevel-cover-perl

or using CPAN:

  perl -MCPAN -e 'install Devel::Cover'

and that will install the required module. Other OSes may have this packaged
as well, so try to find it. If you do not have a packaged version of this
module, head over to http://search.cpan.org/dist/Devel-Cover/ and install it.

=head1 Process

Next, make sure your working parrot directory is as clean as can be. Any left
over files can cause problems when generating the coverage reports.

  make realclean

or

  git clean -dfx

Next, run C<make test> to see if there are any failing tests. Finally you can
type in C<make cover> and leave to make a sandwich and something to drink
because it's probably going to take a I<long> time to run. If you run into
trouble, C<make fulltest> may be of some assistance.

=head1 Cover

If you have run C<make fullcover> before, you know how long it takes to execute
that command. Recently a new tool C<make cover> has been added that is
much faster, but does not run tests in all runcores.

=cut

__END__
Local Variables:
  fill-column:78
End:
vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
