=head1 NAME

t/ - The Parrot Virtual Machine Test Suite

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This directory contains the official Parrot Virtual Machine test suite.

For details on how tests are written see the documentation in
docs/tests.pod L<https://github.com/parrot/parrot/blob/master/docs/tests.pod>.
For status of the testing effort, see t/TESTS_STATUS.pod
L<https://github.com/parrot/parrot/blob/master/t/TESTS_STATUS.pod>.

The script 'harness' actually runs the test suite.

To run the normal Parrot test suite tests:

    make test

To run only the core test suite (intented to be used after C<make corevm>):

    make coretest

The run the full test suite, which is equivalent to "make test" under various
runcores as well as coding standard tests:

    make fulltest

To run just the coding standard tests:

    make codingstd_tests

To create code coverage reports from the Parrot test suite:

    make cover

which requires the Devel::Cover Perl 5 module.

To submit "smoke" reports, you will need to install the TAP::Harness::Archive
and LWP::UserAgent CPAN modules, and then type:

    make smoke

The report will then be visible on Smolder: L<http://smolder.parrot.org/app/projects/smoke_reports/1>

If you only want to submit results of the core test suite to Smolder:

    make smolder_coretest

Below is a list of subdirs along with a short description
of what is tested in there.

=over 4

=item benchmark

Benchmark tests.

=item codingstd

Tests the coding conventions for Parrot source code.

=item compilers

Tests for compilers in Parrot.

=item configure

Tests for the Perl modules in our configuration subsystem.

=item distro

Tests that run before a distribution is released. Can be run with:

    make distro_tests

=item doc

Tests for the completeness and sanity of the documentation.

=item dynoplibs

Tests for dynamic (loadable at run-time) opcode libraries.

=item dynpmc

Tests for dynamic PMCs.

=item examples

Tests to check whether the examples are still working. Can be run with:

    make examples_tests

=item library

Test Parrot modules that ship with core. Can be run with:

    make library_tests

=item manifest

Tests for the functionality supporting the creation of MANIFEST and related files. Can be run with:

    make manifest_tests

=item native_pbc

Tests Parrot Byte Code.

=item oo

Tests for object oriented features of Parrot. Can be run with

    make oo_tests

=item op

Tests for Parrot opcodes. Can be run with

    make op_tests

=item perl

Tests for the Perl 5 modules used for configuration, building and testing of
Parrot. Can be run with:

    make perl_tests

=item pharness

Tests for the functionality supporting Parrot's test harnesses.

=item pmc

Tests for Parrot PMCs. Can be run with

    make pmc_tests

=item postconfigure

Tests of configuration system run after configuration has completed.

=item run

Tests for the command line options of the 'parrot' executable. Can be run with:

    make run_tests

=item src

Tests written in C, mostly for the Embed/Extend subsystems. Can be run with

    make src_tests

=item steps

Tests for the steps in the Parrot configuration process.

=item stress

Stress testing. Make Parrot sweat.

=item tools

Tests for tools useful to Parrot core and HLL developers

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2005-2011, Parrot Foundation.

=cut
