=head1 contributing to tcl/parrot

a brief overview on how to help out, if you're interested. In general, 
it's ok to send patches for tcl to the RT system for anything that isn't
"BIG STUFF" - those, please bounce off the MAINTAINERS first.
We'd prefer C<diff -u> patches, but are happy to take complete files as well.

Since partcl is bundled with the parrot source, svn access is handled via
the same mechanism as for parrot itself. 

=head1 BIG STUFF

=over 4

=item Writing Builtins

partcl is a compiler. Given a section of tcl code, it translates that code
into an AST (in the form of a Tcl* object from lib/*). Once a section of code
has been translated, the object's C<compile> method is invoked, which then
generates PIR which can be compiled by parrot.

The commands themselves have (well, some of them do) inlineable (compiled) 
versions: These are
in lib/builtins, and all new development should go here. There are many
old, runtime-only versions that exist in lib/commands. All *new* development
should occur in lib/builtins. Minor patches to things in lib/commands are
ok, though.

When you define an inline-able builtin,
C<tcl.pl> will automatically generate a version similar in those in
lib/commands/ that
invokes the inline'able version, compiles it, invokes it, and returns
the result immediately. The compiler will fall back to this version as 
necessary, you don't have to worry about it.

When writing inlined builtins, there are two variants: those generated
automatically by running C<tools/gen_inline.pl>, and those that are
handrolled.

Templates for inlined builtins look a lot like a perl hash that defines
the various arguments, options, and code for the builtin. By switching
to this declarative scheme, we hope to elminate a lot of the bookkeeping
code, as well as simplify generations. While we're using perl to generate
the code, this is a one time cost at build time: at run time, we
are using PIR. (Which in turn generates PIR itself).

Handrolled inlined builtins take two args: a TclCompiler, and a single
container PMC with the various args. The container
PMC has objects generated from parser that need to be compiled themselves
before you can rely on their values. Your return value is simply the compiler
object.  You should only use this
method for generating builtins if a builtin cannot be defined using a template,
and even then, extending the template parser is probably the right answer.

(This is as opposed to the interpreted style in lib/commands, which takes
a variable number of already compiled args at runtime. Our fallback method
bundles these up, passing in a starting register of 0, and uses the resulting
PIR to generate a .sub immediately and then invoke it. The runtime fallback
is always going to be necessary for HLL interoperability.)

Remember, every arg to your builtin is potentially variable and may change
at runtime. You can check the type of the object at compile time. However,
if it's constant, then you can optimize: for example, we could optimize 
[puts -nonewline "whee\n"] down to, basically, {print "whee\n"}... however,
we still have to be able to deal with [set a -nonewline; puts $a "whee\n"].
So, your first pass should probably do no optimizations. If you see a potential
for optimization, however, at least add an XXX comment so we can get back to
it later. At this point, I'd rather spend time working on new features than
making existing features faster.

The results of calling
the inlined code will be used by C<lib/tclcommand.pir>. The inlined code
is further wrapped in a protective conditional which will skip
the inlined version if it can no longer be trusted (that is, if [proc]
or [rename] has been invoked), and will fall back to
the interpreted version as necessary. (And throw an exception if the command
is not found at runtime.).

=item speed

We're currently slow, compared to tclsh. It's not worth worrying about
this in terms of specific numbers until we can run C<tcltest> natively. That
said, any patches that improve speed without harming maintainability will of
course be applied.

=item features

We're currently missing some things that require support from parrot. See
L<hacks.pod> for a list. In general, though, a lot of what we need to do is
possible with parrot.

If you're looking for something to todo, see L<TODO> one level up.

=back

=head1 DOCUMENTATION

=over 4

=item pod

Every PIR .sub that's defined should probably have some POD to go along
with it to document the arguments and return values. Only exceptions to
this should be subs which correspond directly to Tcl builtins -- those
are already documented elsewhere.

=item big picture docs.

Are the docs in C<docs/> useful? Could use someone to proof them, and
verify that there are no missing chunks (if missing, write them, or 
get them added to the C<TODO>), and that they are coherent.

=back

=head1 PIR

=over 4

=item Missing Commands

Every builtin command corresponds to an appropriately named file
in C<src/builtins> or C<runtime/builtins> - Each of these subs takes some
number of PMCs
as arguments. For those commands that take a fixed number of parameters,
we declare them with C<.param>. For those that take a variable number,
we use the C<foldup> opcode.

If the return value would be TCL_OK, then simply C<.return> the value
from the sub. For any other return type, use one of the macros in 
C<src/returncodes.pir>: C<.throw>, etc. the value can be any simple
register or a PMC, the calling conventions will autobox as necessary.

Before adding new functionality, add a test (or a test in an existing) file 
in C<t/> - tests for C<puts>, for example, go in C<t/cmd_puts.t> - 
we use the C<Test::Harness> framework, via C<Parrot::Test>. 

Our final goal will be to pass (most of) the tcl test suite: run 
C<make tcl-test> to checkout the latest version of of the tcl test suite
and run it. Warning: slow...

Long term goal is remove any tests in C<t/> that are testing things
that are already tested in the official tcl suite.
Partcl's checked in test suite should just
be checking partcl-specific functionaliity.

=back

=cut

