=pod

=head1 Parrot Compiler Tools

Z<CHP-4>

Parrot is able to natively compile and execute code in two low-level
languages, PASM and PIR. These two languages, which are very similar to
one another, are very close to the machine and analagous to assembly
languages from hardware processors and other virtual machines. While they
do expose the power of the PVM in a very direct way, PASM and PIR are not
designed to be used for writing large or maintainable programs. For these
tasks, higher level languages such as Perl 6, Python 3, Tcl, Ruby, and PHP
are preferred instead, and the ultimate goal of Parrot is to support these
languages and more. The question is, how do we get programs written in these
languages running on Parrot? The answer is PCT.

PCT is a set of classes and tools that enable the easy creation of
compilers for high level languages (HLLs) that will run on Parrot. PCT is
itself written in PIR, and compiles HLL code down to PIR for compilation
and execution on Parrot, but allows the compiler designer to do most work
in a high-level dialect of the Perl 6 language. The result is a flexible,
dynamic language that can be used for creating other flexible, dynamic
languages.


=head2 History

The Parrot Virtual Machine was originally conceived of as the engine for
executing the new Perl 6 language, when specifications for that were first
starting to be drafted. However, as time went on it was decided that Parrot
would benefit from having a clean abstraction layer between it's internals
and the Perl 6 language syntax. This clean abstraction layer brought with it
the side effect that Parrot could be used to host a wide variety of dynamic
languages, not just Perl 6. And beyond just hosting them, it could
facilitate their advancement, interaction, and code sharing.

The end result is that Parrot is both powerful enough to support one of the
most modern and powerful dynamic languages, Perl 6, but well-encapsulated
enough to host other languages as well. Parrot would be more powerful and
feature-full than any single language, and would provide all that power and
all those features to any languages that wanted them.

Perl 6, under the project name Rakudo N<http://www.rakudo.org>, is still one
of the primary users of Parrot and therefore one of the primary drivers in
its development. However, compilers for other dynamic languages such as
Python 3, Ruby, Tcl, are under active development. Several compilers exist
which are not being as actively developed, and many compilers exist for
new languages and toy languages which do not exist anywhere else.

=head2 Capabilities and Benefits

Parrot exposes a rich interface for high level languages to use, including
several important features: a robust exceptions system, compilation into
platform-independent bytecode, a clean extension and embedding interface,
just-in-time compilation to machine code, native library interface mechanisms,
garbage collection, support for objects and classes, and a robust concurrency
model.  Designing a new language or implementing a new compiler for an old
language is easier with all of these features designed, implemented, tested,
and supported in a VM already. In fact, the only tasks required of compiler
implementers who target the Parrot platform is the creation of the parser
and the language runtime.

Parrot also has a number of other benefits for compiler writers to tap into:

=over 4

=item * Write Once and Share

All HLLs on Parrot ultimately compile down to Parrot's platform-independent
bytecode which Parrot can execute natively. This means at the lowest level
Parrot supports interoperability between programs written in multiple high
level languages. Find a library you want to use in Perl's CPAN
N<http://www.cpan.org>? Have a web framework you want to use that's written
in Ruby? A mathematics library that only has C bindings? Want to plug all
of these things into a web application you are writing in PHP? Parrot
supports this and more.

=item * Native Library Support

Parrot has a robust system for interfacing with external native code
libraries, such as those commonly written in C, C++, Fortran and other
compiled languages. Where previously every interpreter would need to
maintain it's own bindings and interfaces to libraries, Parrot enables
developers to write library bindings once and use them seamlessly from
any language executing on Parrot. Want to use Tcl's Tk libraries, along with
Python's image manipulation libraries in a program you are writing in Perl?
Parrot supports that.

=back

=head2 Compilation and Hosting

For language hosting and interoperability to work, languages developers need
to write compilers that convert source code written in high level languages
to Parrot's bytecode.  This process is analogous to how a compiler such as
GCC converts C or C++ into machine code -- though instead of targeting
machine code for a specific hardware platform, compilers written in Parrot
produce Parrot code which can run on any hardware platform that can run
Parrot.

Creating a compiler for Parrot written directly in PIR is possible. Creating
a compiler in C using the common tools lex and yacc is also possible.
Neither of these options are really as good, as fast, or as powerful as
writing a compiler using PCT.

PCT is a suite of compiler tools that helps to abstract and automate the
process of writing a new compiler on Parrot. Lexical analysis, parsing,
optimization, resource allocation, and code generation are all handled
internally by PCT and the compiler designer does not need to be concerned
with any of it.


=head2 PCT Overview

The X<Parrot Compiler Tools;PCT> Parrot Compiler Tools (PCT) enable the
creation of high-level language compilers and runtimes.  Though the Perl 6
development team originally created these tools to aide in the development
of the Rakudo Perl 6 implementation, several other Parrot-hosted compilers
also use PCT to great effect. Writing a compiler using Perl 6 syntax and
dynamic language tools is much easier than writing a compiler in C,
C<lex>, and C<yacc>.

PCT is broken down into three separate tools:

=over 4

=item * Not Quite Perl (NQP)

NQP a subset of the Perl 6 language that requires no runtime library to
execute.

=item * Perl Grammar Engine (PGE)

PGE is an implementation of Perl 6's powerful regular expression and grammar
tools.

=item * HLLCompiler

The HLLCompiler compiler helps to manage and encapsulate the compilation
process. An HLLCompiler object, once created, enables the user to use the
compiler interactively from the commandline, in batch mode from code files,
or at runtime using a runtime eval.

=back

=head2 Grammars and Action Files

A PCT-based compiler requires three basic files: the main entry point file
which is typically written in PIR, the grammar specification file which uses
PGE, and the grammar actions file which is in NQP. These are just the three
mandatory components, most languages are also going to require additional
files for runtime libraries and other features as well.

=over 4

=item * The main file

The main file is (often) a PIR program which contains the C<:main> function
that creates and executes the compiler object. This program instantiates a
C<PCT::HLLCompiler> subclass, loads any necessary support libraries, and
initializes any compiler- or languages-specific data.

The main file tends to be short.  The guts of the compiler logic is in the
grammar and actions files.  Runtime support and auxiliary functions often
appear in other files, by convention.  This separation of concerns tends to
make compilers easier to maintain.

=item * A grammar file

The high-level language's grammar appears in a F<.pg> file.  This file
subclasses the C<PCT::Grammar> class and implements all of the necessary
rules -- written using PGE -- to parse the language.

=item * An actions file

Actions contains methods -- written in NQP -- on the C<PCT::Grammar:Actions>
object which receive parse data from the grammar rules and construct an
X<Abstract Syntax Tree;Parrot Abstract Syntax Tree;AST;PAST> Abstract Syntax
Tree (AST).N<The Parrot version of an AST is, of course, the Parrot Abstract
Syntax Tree, or PAST.>

=back

PCT's workflow is customizable, but simple.  The compiler passes the source
code of the HLL into the grammar engine.  The grammer engine parses this code
and returns a X<PGE;Match Object> special Match object which represents a
parsed version of the code.  The compiler then passes this match object to the
action methods, which convert it in stages into PAST.  The compiler finally
converts this PAST into PIR code, which it can save to a file, convert to
bytecode, or execute directly.

=head3 C<mk_language_shell.pl>

The only way creating a new language compiler could be easier is if these files
created themselves. PCT includes a tool to do just that:
C<mk_language_shell.pl>.  This program automatically creates a new directory in
F<languages/> for your new language, the necessary three files, starter files
for libraries, a F<Makefile> to automate the build process, and a basic test
harness to demonstrate that your language works as expects.

These generated files are all stubs which will require extensive editing to
implement a full language, but they are a well-understood and working starting
point.  With this single command you can create a working compiler.  It's up to
you to fill the details.

C<mk_language_shell.pl> prefers to run from within a working Parrot repository.
It requires a single argument, the name of the new project to create.  There
are no hard-and-fast rules about names, but the Parrot developers reccomend
that Parrot-based implementations of existing languages use unique names.

Consider the names of Perl 5 distributions: Active Perl and Strawberry Perl.
Python implementations are IronPython (running on the CLR) and Jython (running
on the JVM).  The Ruby-on-Parrot compiler isn't just "Ruby": it's Cardinal.
The Tcl compiler on Parrot is Partcl.

An entirely new language has no such constraints.

From the Parrot directory, invoke C<mk_language_shell.pl> like:

  $ B<cd languages/>
  $ B<perl ../tools/dev/mk_language_shell.pl <project name>>

=head3 Parsing Fundamentals

An important part of a compiler is the parser and lexical analyzer.  The
lexical analyzer converts the HLL input file into individual tokens. A token
may consist of an individual punctuation ("+"), an identifier ("myVar"), a
keyword ("while"), or any other artifact that stands on its own as a single
unit.  The parser attempts to match a stream of these input tokens against a
given pattern, or grammar. The matching process orders the input tokens into an
abstract syntax tree which the other portions of the compiler can process.

X<top-down parser>
X<bottom-up parser>
X<parsers; top-down>
X<parsers; bottom-up>
Parsers come in top-down and bottom-up varieties. Top-down parsers start with a
top-level rule which represents the entire input. It attempts to match various
combination of subrules until it has consumed the entire input.  Bottom-down
parsers start with individual tokens from the lexical analyzer and attempt to
combine them together into larger and larger patterns until they produce a
top-level token.

PGE is a top-down parser, although it also contains a bottom-up I<operator
precedence> parser to make processing token clusters such as mathematical
expressions more efficient.

=head2 Driver Programs

The driver program for the new compiler must create instances of the various
necessary classes that run the parser. It must also include the standard
function libraries, create global variables, and handle commandline options.
PCT provides several useful command-line options, but driver programs may need
to override several behaviors.

PCT programs can run in two ways.  An interactive mode runs one statement at a
time in the console.  A file mode loads and runs an entire file at once.  A
driver program may specificy information about the interactive prompt and
environment, as well as help and error messages.

=head3 C<HLLCompiler> class

The C<HLLCompiler> class implements a compiler object. This object contains
references to language-specific parser grammar and actions files, as well as
the steps involved in the compilation process.  The stub compiler created by
C<mk_language_shell.pl> might resemble:

  .sub 'onload' :anon :load :init
      load_bytecode 'PCT.pbc'
      $P0 = get_hll_global ['PCT'], 'HLLCompiler'
      $P1 = $P0.'new'()
      $P1.'language'('MyCompiler')
      $P1.'parsegrammar'('MyCompiler::Grammar')
      $P1.'parseactions'('MyCompiler::Grammar::Actions')
  .end

  .sub 'main' :main
      .param pmc args
      $P0 = compreg 'MyCompiler'
      $P1 = $P0.'command_line'(args)
  .end

The C<:onload> function creates the driver object as an instance of
C<HLLCompiler>, sets the necessary options, and registers the compiler with
Parrot. The C<:main> function drives parsing and execution begin. It calls the
C<compreg> opcode to retrieve the registered compiler object for the language
"MyCompiler" and invokes that compiler object using the options received from
the commandline.

The C<compreg> opcode hides some of Parrot's magic; you can use it multiple
times in a program to compile and run different languages. You can create
multiple instances of a compiler object for a single language (such as for
runtime C<eval>) or you can create compiler objects for multiple languages for
easy interoperability. The Rakudo Perl 6 C<eval> function uses this mechanism
to allow runtime eval of code snippets in other languages:

  eval("puts 'Konnichiwa'", :lang<Ruby>);

=head3 C<HLLCompiler> methods

The previous example showed the use of several HLLCompiler methods:
C<language>, C<parsegrammar>, and C<parseactions>.  These three methods are the
bare minimum interface any PCT-based compiler should provide.  The C<language>
method takes a string argument that is the name of the compiler. The
HLLCompiler object uses this name to register the compiler object with Parrot.
The C<parsegrammar> method creates a reference to the grammar file that you
write with PGE. The C<parseactions> method takes the class name of the NQP file
used to create the AST-generator for the compiler.

If your compiler needs additional features, there are several other available
methods:

=over 4

=item * C<commandline_prompt>

The C<commandline_prompt> method allows you to specify a custom prompt to
display to users in interactive mode.

=item * C<commandline_banner>

The C<commandline_banner> method allows you to specify a banner message that
displays at the beginning of interactive mode.

=back

=cut

# Local variables:
#   c-file-style: "parrot"
# End:
# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
