=head1 NAME

Parrot - running

=head1 VERSION

=over 4

=item 0.0.1 initial

=item 0.0.9.10 changed run options

=item 0.0.9.12 changed debug options

=item 0.0.10.0 imcc is parrot

=item 0.0.10.1 add -E switch

=back

=head1 OVERVIEW

This document describes parrot's command line options.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 parrot [-options] <file> [arguments ...]

=head1 OPTIONS

=head2 IMCC options

=over 4

=item -a, --pasm

Assume PASM input on stdin.

=item -c, --pbc

Assume PBC file on stdin, run it.

=item -d, --debug [hexbits]

The B<-d> switch takes an optional argument which is considered to hold
a hex value of debug bits. Without a value, debug is set to 1.

The individual bits are:

 DEBUG_PARROT 0x0001
 DEBUG_LEXER  0x0002
 DEBUG_PARSER 0x0004
 DEBUG_IMC    0x0008
 DEBUG_CFG    0x0010
 DEBUG_OPT1   0x0020
 DEBUG_OPT2   0x0040
 DEBUG_PBC    0x1000
 DEBUG_PBC_CONST    0x2000
 DEBUG_PBC_FIXUP    0x4000

To produce really huge output on F<stderr> run "imcc B<-d 0ffff> ...".
Note: if the argument is separated by whitespace from the B<-d> switch,
it has to start with a number.

=item -h, --help

=item -o outputfile

Act like assembler. Don't run code, unless B<-r> is given too. If the
outputfile ends with B<.pbc>, a PBC file is written. If it ends with
B<.pasm>, a PASM output is generated, even from PASM input. This can be
handy to check various optimizations, including B<-Op>.

=item -r, --run-pbc

=item -v, --verbose

One B<-v> shows which files are worked on and prints a summary
over register usage and optimization stats per I<compilation unit>.
With two B<-v> switches, IMCC prints a line per individual processing
step too.

=item -y, --yydebug

Turn on yydebug in F<yacc>/F<bison>.

=item -V, --version

=item -Ox

Optimize

 -O0 no optimization (default)
 -O1 optimizations w/o life info (e.g. branches)
 -O  same
 -O2 optimizations with life info
 -Op rewrite I and N PASM registers most used first

This will probably change.

=item -E, --pre-process-only

Preprocess sorce file (i.e. expand macros) and print result to stdout. E.g.

  $ parrot -E t/op/macro_10.pasm
  $ parrot -E t/op/macro_10.pasm | parrot -- -

=back

=head2 Parrot Options

See parrot B<-h> for description. Used when running a program inside
imcc.

=head1 <file>

If the file ends in B<.pbc> it will be interpreted immediately.

If the file ends in B<.pasm>, then it is parsed as PASM code. Otherwise,
it is parsed as PIR code. In both cases, it will then be run, unless the
B<-o> flag was given.
If the B<file> is a single dash, input from B<stdin> is read.

=head2 Generated files

If debugging is enabled these files are generated:

  file.stabs.s ... stabsfile for the program
  file.o ... object file with debug information
  EVAL_n ... source of B<compile> op nr. I<N>
  EVAL_n.stabs.s ... stabsfile for this block
  EVAL_n.o ... object file with debug information

=head1 [arguments ...]

Optional arguments passed to the running program as ARGV, only useful
for running the program.

=head1 Operation table

 Command line		Action		Output
 ---------------------------------------------
 parrot x.imc		run
 parrot x.pasm		run
 parrot x.pbc		run
 -o x.pasm x.imc	ass		x.pasm
 -o x.pasm y.pasm	ass		x.pasm
 -o x.pbc  x.imc	ass		x.pbc
 -o x.pbc  x.pasm	ass		x.pbc
 -o x.pbc -r x.pasm	ass/run		x.pbc


=head1 BUGS

None currently known.

=head1 FILES

F<main.c>

=head1 AUTHOR

Leopold Toetsch <lt@toetsch.at>


