# Copyright: 2001-2005 The Perl Foundation.  All Rights Reserved.
# $Id$

=head1 NAME

docs/glossary.pod - Parrot Glossary

=head1 SUMMARY

Short descriptions of words you might need to know that show up in
Parrot development.

=head1 GLOSSARY

=for comment
Please keep me alphabetical!

=head2 Continuations

Think of continuations as an execution "context". This context includes
everything local to that execution path, not just the stack. It is a snapshot
in time (minus global variables). While it is similar to C's C<setjmp> (taking
the continuation)/C<longjmp> (invoking the continuation), C<longjmp>'ing only
works "down" the stack; jumping "up" the stack (ie, back to a frame that has
returned) is bad. Continuations can work either way. 

We can do two important things with continuations:

=over 4

=item 1

Create and pass a continuation object to a subroutine, which may recursively
pass that object up the call chain until, at some point, the continuation can
be called/executed to handle the final computation or return value. This is
pretty much tail recursion.

=item 2

Continuations can be taken at an arbitrary call depth, freezing the call chain
(context) at that point in time. If we save that continuation object into a
variable, we can later reinstate the complete context by its "handle". This
allows neat things like backtracking that aren't easily done in conventional
stacked languages, such as C. Since continuations represent "branches" in
context, it requires an environment that uses some combination of heap-based
stacks, stack trees and/or stack copying.

=back

It is common in a system that supports continuations to implement
L<co-routines|"Co-Routines"> on top of them.

A continuation is a sort of super-closure. When you take a continuation, it
makes a note of the current call stack and lexical scratchpads, along with the
current location in the code. When you invoke a continuation, the system drops
what it's doing, puts the call stack and scratchpads back, and jumps to the
execution point you were at when the continuation was taken. It is, in effect,
like you never left that point in your code.

Note that, like with closures, it only puts the *scratchpads* back in scope -
it doesn't do anything with the values in the variables that are in those
scratchpads.

=for author Melvin Smith C<mrjoltcola@mindspring.com> Dan Sugalski
C<dan@sidhe.org>

=head2 Co-Routines 

Co-routines are virtually identical to normal subroutines, except while
subroutines always execute from their starting instruction to where they
return, co-routines may suspend themselves (or be suspended asynchronously if
the language permits) and resume at that point later. We can implement things
like "factories" with co-routines. If the co-routine never returns, every time
we call it, we "resume" the routine.

A co-routine is a subroutine that can stop in the middle, and start back up
later at the point you stopped. For example:

    sub sample : coroutine {
       print "A\n";
       yield;
       print "B\n";
       return;
    }

    sample();
    print "Foo!\n";
    sample();

will print

     A
     Foo!
     B

Basically, the C<yield> keyword says, "Stop here, but the next time we're
called, pick up at the next statement." If you return from a co-routine, the
next invocation starts back at the beginning.  Co-routines remember all their
state, local variables, and suchlike things.

=for author
Melvin Smith C<mrjoltcola@mindspring.com>
Dan Sugalski C<dan@sidhe.org>

=head2 COW

COW stands for Copy On Write. This is a pure speed-hack technique that copies
strings without actually copying the string data until it's absolutely
necessary.

If you have a string A, and make a copy of it to get string B, the two strings
should be identical, at least to start. With COW, they are, because string A
and string B aren't actually two separate strings - they're the same string,
marked COW. If either string A or string B are changed, the system notes it and
only at that point does it make a copy of the string and change it.

If the program never actually changes the string - something that's fairly
common - the program need never make a copy, saving both memory and time. 

=for author
Nicholas Clark <nick@ccl4.org>, as clarified by Leo

=head2 destruction

Destruction is low level memory clean up, such as calling C<free> on
C<malloc>ed memory.  This happens after L<"finalization">, and if resources
are adequate, may only happen as a side effect of program exit.

=head2 DOD

Dead Object Detection is the process of sweeping through all the objects,
variables, and whatnot inside of Parrot, and deciding which ones are in use and
which ones aren't. The ones that aren't in use are then freed up for later
reuse. (After they're destroyed, if active destruction is warranted.)

See also: L<"GC">

=for author
Nicholas Clark <nick@ccl4.org>, as clarified by Leo

=head2 finalization

Finalization is high-level, user visible cleanup of objects, such as closing an
associated DB handle. Finalization reduces active objects down to passive
blocks of memory, but does not actually reclaim that memory. Memory is
reclaimed by the related L<"destruction"> operation, as and when necessary.

=head2 GC

Garbage Collection is the process of sweeping through all the active objects,
variables, and structures, marking the memory they're using as in use, and all
other memory is freed up for later reuse. 

Garbage Collection and Dead Object Detection are separate in Parrot, since we
generally chew through memory segments faster than we chew through objects.
(This is a characteristic peculiar to Perl and other languages that do string
processing. Other languages chew through objects faster than memory)

See also: L<"DOD">

=head2 ICU

International Components for Unicode

ICU is a C and C++ library that provides support for Unicode on a variety of
platforms.  It was added to Parrot with the 0.0.8 release to provide future
Unicode support.

L<http://oss.software.ibm.com/icu/index.html>

=head2 IMC

Parrot InterMediate Code, or another name for PIR.  A convention once arose to
name input files to IMCC with the extension ".imc", so the name IMC became
synonymous with PIR.

See also IMCC, PIR.

=head2 IMCC

Parrot's Intermediate Code Compiler, which started its life as an improved
Parrot assembler, and eventually became so integrated with Parrot that it
became the Parrot executable (being able to load and run PBC files, PASM files
or PIR files).

See also PIR.

=head2 Packfile

Another name for a PBC file, due to the names used for data structures in one
of the early implementations in Perl5.

=head2 PBC

Parrot Byte Code. The name for the "executable" files that can be passed to the
Parrot interpreter for immediate execution (although PASM and IMC files can be
executed directly, too).

See also Packfile.

=head2 PIR

Parrot Intermediate Representation. A medium-level assembly language for Parrot
that hides messy details like register allocation so language compiler writers
who target PIR don't have to roll their own.

See also IMC.

=head2 PMC

PMC is an acronym for Parrot Magic Cookie. (Or Cracker, your choice.)  PMC
classes are the primitives that Parrot-based languages use to represent their
fundamental types, such as Perl's scalar values.

=head2 Predereferencing

A bytecode transformation technique which reduces the amount of pointer
dereferencing done in the inner loop of the interpreter by pre-converting
opcode numbers into pointers to their opfuncs, and also converting the register
numbers and constant numbers in the arguments to the ops into pointers.

The original implementation by Gregor Purdy was posted on 2001-12-11.  On one
test system, it resulted in a 22% speed increase on a test program with a tight
inner loop.

L<http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg06941.html>

On 2001-12-18, predereferencing got a speed boost (to about 47% faster than the
regular DO_OP inner loop -- without compiler optimizations turned on). This was
due to an off-list (actually over lunch) suggestion by John Kennedy that
instead of pre-initializing the new copy of the bytecode with NULL pointers, we
pre-initialize it with pointers to a pseudo-opfunc that does the
predereferencing whenever it is encountered.

On 2002-04-11, Jason Gloudon suggested combining aspects of the Computed Goto
Core and the Prederef[erencing] Core.

L<http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07064.html>

The week of 2003-02-09, Leopold Totsch combined Computed Goto and
Predereferencing to produce the CGP core.

L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/list-summaries/2003/p6summary.2003-02-09.html#Week_of_the_alternative_runloops>

Later, on 2003-02-14, Leopold Totsch and Nicholas Clark combined the JIT and
the Computed Goto Prederef cores to great effect.

L<http://www.perl.com/pub/a/2003/02/p6pdigest/20030216.html>


=head2 Vtable

A table of operations attached to some data types, such as PMCs and strings.
Vtables are used to avoid using switches or long C<if> chains to handle
different data types.  They're similar to method calls, except that their names
are pre-selected.

=for author
From: "Brent Dax" C<brentdax@cpan.org>

=head2 Warnock's Dilemma

The dilemma you face when posting a message to a public forum about something
and not even getting an acknowledgment of its existence. This leaves you
wondering if your problem is unimportant or previously addressed, if everyone's
waiting on someone else to answer you,  or if maybe your mail never actually
made it to anyone else in the forum.

=head1 CORRECTIONS

Please send corrections to the perl6-internals mailing list.

=cut
