# Copyright: 2001-2004 The Perl Foundation.  All Rights Reserved.
# $Id$

=head1 NAME

docs/mmd.pod - Multimethod dispatch for binary opcode functions

=head1 CAVEATS

XXX - Part or all of this document is outdated.  Especially the "the MMD system
doesn't handle inheritance" bit.  Please refer to PDD03 at this moment while we
rewrite or merge this document.  We apologize for the inconvenience.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

This system is set up to handle type-based dispatching for binary (i.e.
two-arg) functions. This includes, though isn't necessarily limited to, binary
operators such as addition or subtraction.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The MMD system is straightforward, and currently must be explicitly invoked,
for example by a vtable function. (We may reserve the right to use MMD in all
circumstances, but currently do not) 

=head2 API

For the purposes of the API, each MMD-able function is assigned a unique number
which is used to find the correct function table. This is the C<func_num>
parameter in the following functions. While Parrot isn't restricted to a
predefined set of functions, it I<does> set things up so that all the binary
vtable functions have a MMD table preinstalled for them, with default
behavior.

=over 4

=item mmd_add_by_class(interp, func_num, left_class, right_class, funcptr)

Adds a new MMD function C<funcptr> to the C<func_num> function table that will
be invoked when the left parameter is of class C<left_class> and the right
parameter is of class C<right_class>. Both classes are C<STRING *>s that hold
the PMC class names for the left and right sides. If either class isn't yet
loaded, Parrot will cache the information such that the function will be
installed if at some point in the future both classes are available.

Currently this is done by just assigning class numbers to the classes, which
the classes will pick up and use if they're later loaded, but we may later put
the functions into a deferred table that we scan when PMC classes are loaded.
Either way, the function will be guaranteed to be installed when it's needed.

The function table must exist, but if it is too small, it will automatically be
expanded.

=item mmd_register(interp, func_num, left_type, right_type, funcptr)

Register a function C<funcptr> for MMD function table C<func_num> for classes
C<left_type> and C<right_type>. The left and right types are C<INTVAL>s that
represent the class ID numbers.

The function table must exist, but if it is too small, it will automatically be
expanded.

Currently the MMD system doesn't handle inheritance and best match searching,
as it assumes that all PMC types have no parent type. This can be considered a
bug, and will be resolved at some point in the future.

=item mmd_dispatch_pmc(interp, left, right, dest, func_num)

Dispatch to a multimethod that "returns" a PMC. C<left>, C<right>, and C<dest>
are all PMC pointers, while C<func_num> is the MMD table that should be used to
do the dispatching.

The MMD system will figure out which function should be called based on the
types of C<left> and C<right> and call it, passing in C<left>, C<right>, and
C<dest> like any other binary vtable function.

This function has a void return type, like all the "take two PMCs, return a
PMC" vtable functions do.

=item STRING *mmd_dispatch_string(interp, left, right, func_num)

Dispatch to a multimethod that returns a string. C<left> and C<right>
are PMC pointers, while C<func_num> is the MMD table that should be
used to do the dispatching. The function is responsible for creating
the returned string.

=item INTVAL mmd_dispatch_intval(interp, left, right, func_num)

Like C<mmd_dispatch_string>, only it returns an INTVAL.

=item FLOATVAL mmd_dispatch_floatval(interp, left, right, func_num)

Like C<mmd_dispatch_string>, only it returns a FLOATVAL.

=item mmd_add_function(interp, func_num, default_func)

Add a new function table to the list of functions the MMD system knows of.
C<func_num> is the number of the new function, while C<default_func> is the
function to be called when the system doesn't know which function it should
call. (Because, for example, there hasn't been a function installed that
matches the left and right types for a call)

=back

=head2 Constants

The following constants are defined to identify function tables:

=over 4

=item MMD_ADD

Addition

=item MMD_SUBTRACT

Subtraction

=item MMD_MULTIPLY

Multiplication

=item MMD_DIVIDE

Division

=item MMD_MOD

Accurate modulus

=item MMD_CMOD

C-style modulus

=item MMD_BAND

Binary and

=item MMD_BOR

Binary or

=item MMD_BXOR

Binary xor

=item MMD_BSL

Bitshift left

=item MMD_BSR

Bitshift right

=item MMD_CONCAT

String concatenation

=item MMD_LAND

Short-circuiting logical and

=item MMD_LOR

Short-circuiting logical or

=item MMD_LXOR

Logical xor (not short-circuiting)

=item MMD_REPEAT

String repetition

=item MMD_NUMEQ

Numeric equality

=item MMD_STREQ

String equality

=item MMD_NUMCMP

Numeric comparison

=item MMD_STRCMP

String comparison

=item MMD_SOR

Bitwise or of the string value

=item MMD_SAND

Bitwise and of the string value

=item MMD_SXOR

Bitwise xor of the string value

=back

=head2 Defaults

By default, functions are installed for all the functions that have constants
associated with them. They are all functions suitable for calling with
C<mmd_dispatch_pmc>.

The math functions (add, subtract, multiply, and divide) all work on the float
values of the left and right sides.

The cmod function does a plan C-style mod (the C C<%> operator) on the integer
value of the left and right sides.

The mod function does an fmod on the float values of the two sides.

The bitwise functions (and, or, xor, left shift, right shift) work on the
integer values of the two sides.

The concat function concatenates the string values of the left and right sides.

The logical functions (and, or, xor) use the boolean values of the left and
right sides to see whether they should set_pmc the destination to the left or
right sides. The C<and> and C<or> functions short-circuit, C<xor> does not.

The repeat function gets the string value of the left side and the integer
value of the right.

The numeric equal and numeric comparison functions work on the float values of
both sides.

The string equal and comparison functions work on the string values of both
sides.

The string bitwise ops (and, or, xor) take the string values of both sides and
do bitwise operations on the resulting bitstring.
