# Copyright: 2001-2004 The Perl Foundation.  All Rights Reserved.
# $Id$

=head1 NAME

docs/native_exec.pod - Parrot Native Object Execution Subsystem

=head1 Overview

On supported platforms, Parrot can use the JIT subsystem to assemble a native
executable binary from a Parrot program.  This method wraps the VM runtime
engine and a precompiled Parrot program into a single binary.

=head1 Generating a native executable

Generating a native executable is done in three steps: building a packfile,
assembling a native object, and then linking the native executable.  The
packfile is generated in the standard way from .imc or .pasm source by IMCC.
For a program in myprog.pasm:

    ./parrot -o myprog.pbc myprog.pasm

This generates the myprog.pbc packfile.  The native object is generated
similarly:

    ./parrot -o myprog.o myprog.pbc

This creates a native object called myprog.o.  Assembly of the executable is
done by the "exec" target in the root Makefile like so:

    make EXEC=myprog exec

This generates the "myprog" executable, which runs equivalently to

    ./parrot -j myprog.pbc

minus the time required to JIT-compile the bytecode.     

The "testexec" Makefile target demonstrates this method for a "Hello world"
program.

=head1 Details

=head2 Platform support

The exec subsystem is enabled if support is determined automatically by
config/auto/jit.pl, or if --execcapable is explicitly specified to
Configure.pl.  The platform must support the JIT core, and some additional
scaffold in the exec* sources must be provided.  Implementation of such is
beyond the scope of this document.

=head2 Native object generation

Native objects are generated by the "exec" run core.  This core uses the JIT
subsystem to compile a packfile to native instructions, then serializes it to
the platform's native object format.  This object is then loaded at runtime and
executed using the normal JIT core.

Unlike the standard cores (switch, computed goto, etc.) which are activated by
command-line switch, the exec core is invoked by IMCC when the output file
specified by the -o option has a .o extension.  When creating a native object
this way, IMCC requires that the input be a packfile.  This process therefore
must be performed in two steps, building the packfile and assembling the native
object, as demonstrated above.

=head2 Executable generation

A native executable is generated by linking a native object against the parrot
library and the loader in exec_start.c.  The "exec" target in the root Makefile
does this with the compile flags used to build parrot itself.  Alternatively it
may be done by hand, e.g.

    gcc -o myprog myprog.o src/exec_start.o blib/lib/libparrot.a

Additional libraries may need to be included as appropriate for the platform.

