=head1 NAME

parrothist - the parrot history records

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document aims to record the parrot source code releases.

=head1 INTRODUCTION

Parrot history in brief...

... ok, done!

=head1 THE KEEPERS OF THE PUMPKIN

Simon Cozens, Jeff Goff, Steve Fink, Leo Toetsch, Chip Salzenberg.

=head2 PUMPKIN?

[from Porting/pumpkin.pod in the Perl source code distribution]

Chip Salzenberg gets credit for that, with a nod to his cow orker,
David Croy.  We had passed around various names (baton, token, hot
potato) but none caught on.  Then, Chip asked:

[begin quote]

   Who has the patch pumpkin?

To explain:  David Croy once told me once that at a previous job,
there was one tape drive and multiple systems that used it for backups.
But instead of some high-tech exclusion software, they used a low-tech
method to prevent multiple simultaneous backups: a stuffed pumpkin.
No one was allowed to make backups unless they had the "backup pumpkin".

[end quote]

The name has stuck.  The holder of the pumpkin is sometimes called
the pumpking (keeping the source afloat?) or the pumpkineer (pulling
the strings?).

=head1 THE RECORDS

 Pump-  Release         Date            Notes
 king                                   (by no means
                                         comprehensive,
                                         see Changes*
                                         for details)
 ===========================================================================

 Simon   0.0.1          2001-Sep-10
         0.0.2          2001-Oct-05
         0.0.3          2001-Dec-08
         0.0.4          2002-Mar-19

 Jeff    0.0.5          2002-Apr-16
         0.0.6          2002-Jun-04
         0.0.7          2002-Jul-18
         0.0.8          2002-Sep-01
         0.0.8.1        2002-Sep-01

 Steve   0.0.9          2002-Dec-19
         0.0.10         2003-Mar-16
         0.0.11         2003-Sep-20
         0.0.11.2       2003-Sep-22

 Leo     0.0.13         2003-Oct-31
         0.1.0          2004-Feb-29
         0.1.1          2004-Oct-09
         0.1.2          2005-Mar-06
         0.2.0          2005-May-08
         0.2.1          2005-Jun-04
         0.2.2          2005-Jul-03
         0.2.3          2005-Aug-05
         0.3.0          2005-Oct-01
         0.3.1          2005-Nov-06
         0.4.0          2005-Dec-04
         0.4.1          2006-Jan-08
         0.4.2          2006-Feb-22
         0.4.3          2006-Apr-02
         0.4.4          2006-May-14
         0.4.5          2006-Jun-19

 Chip    0.4.6          2006-Aug-08

=cut
