# Copyright: 2001-2004 The Perl Foundation.  All Rights Reserved.
# $Id$

=head1 NAME

docs/porting_intro.pod - Parrot Subsystem Porting Introduction

=head1 OVERVIEW

This document is an introduction to porting the optional subsystems of Parrot
onto a new architecture once the core successfully builds.  It assumes passing
familiarity with common VM techniques but relatively little knowledge of Parrot
internals.  For each feature, a brief description of its purpose, hints on
helping to port it, and pointers to more information are included.

=head1 CGoto

=head2 What it is

"Computed goto" is a non-standard C feature that allows taking a pointer to an
statement label (e.g. "LOOP:" ) using the unary && operator.  Certain Parrot
runcores make use of this feature as an optimization.

=head2 How to help

If cgoto is not supported in Parrot by default on your platform, try to compile
config/auto/cgoto/test_c.in with your C compiler and determine why it fails.
If the compiler does not support the computed goto concept at all, this feature
cannot be made to work (don't worry, there are other runcores).  However, if
the compiler supports it but the test is inadequate, please submit a bug report
describing how the implementation of this feature differs from what Parrot
expects.

Note that gcc supports this feature out of the box, though it sometimes
struggles with it in low-memory situations.  Failures during compilation of
core_ops_cg.c are frequently caused by insufficient resources rather than bugs
in gcc or Parrot.

=head2 References

=over 4

=item * F<config/auto/cgoto/test_c.in>

=item * I<make testC>

=back

=head1 JIT

=head2 What it is

Parrot contains a just-in-time compilation subsystem that compiles Parrot
bytecode into native processor instructions just prior to execution,
eliminating much of the overhead of bytecode interpretation.

=head2 How to help

Each unique processor target requires its own JIT engine.  So far, engines have
been implemented for DEC Alpha, ARM, Intel i386, SGI MIPS, PPC, and Sun4.  If
you know that your architecture is substantially similar to one of these,
adding support may be possible with relatively little effort.  Implementing a
novel JIT core from scratch is a substantial undertaking.

=head2 References

=over 4

=item * F<docs/jit.pod>

=item * F<jit/$arch/*>

=item * I<make testj>

=item * F<t/op/jit.t>

=back

=head1 Native Exec

=head2 What it is

Parrot's "native exec" feature allows the integration of the parrot runtime and
a Parrot program into a single precompiled binary, reducing program start-up
cost and negating the need to package Parrot distinctly from an application.
It's perl2exe/PerlApp/PAR for the Parrot generation.

=head2 How to help

The exec feature makes use of the JIT subsystem, and requires supporting code
with knowledge of the operating system's native object format.  This feature is
only supported on JITable architectures (for now, just x86) running Linux,
*BSD, or Darwin.  An interested Parrot hacker with an eligible platform can
contribute by submitting patches which emit exec objects in the OS's native
object format (e.g., ELF, a.out, XCOFF).

=head2 References

=over 4

=item * F<docs/native_exec.pod>

=item * F<src/exec*.c>

=item * F<include/parrot/exec*.h>

=item * F<config/auto/jit.pl>

=back

=head1 Threads

=head2 What it is

Parrot abstracts parallel streams of execution (threads) using a small set of
concurrency primitives that operate on thread objects with distinct code paths
and private data.  Architecture-specific threading models are mapped onto to
these primitives to provide Parrot threads with the most desirable features of
native threads.  Native thread support is very important to the adoption of
Parrot.

=head2 How to help

At present Parrot implements support only for POSIX threads (pthreads).  Most
modern UNIX-like operating systems have a pthreads implementation, and allowing
Parrot to use these is frequently just a matter of finding the right compiler
and linker flags.  Non-POSIX architectures with substantially different
threading models will require more implementation and debugging to work with
Parrot.

To assist with enhancing threading support, compare the threading primitives
required by Parrot in F<thread.h> to those provided by your platform's
threading model(s) and implement Parrot threads in terms of native threads.
See F<thr_pthread.h> for an example of this.

=head2 References

=over 4

=item * F<t/pmc/threads.t>

=item * F<config/gen/platform/*/threads.h>

=item * F<src/thread.c>

=item * F<include/parrot/thread.h>

=item * F<include/parrot/thr_pthread.h>

=back

=head1 Signals

=head2 What it is

Parrot must be able to receive asynchronous imperative and advisory messages
from the operating system and other local processes in a safe manner.
Typically this is done by registering message-specific callback functions,
to which the operating system transfers control when signals are generated.

=head2 How to help

UNIX-like systems usually employ the signal() function for this purpose;
Windows achieves similar functionality with message queues.  For now, Parrot
assumes a mechanism like the former can be used.  Currently the signal handler
test suite only operates under Linux, though the mechanism itself is intended
to work wherever Parrot does.  Portable tests as well as fixes for failures
thereof are greatly needed.

=head2 References

=over 4

=item * F<config/gen/platform/*/signal.[ch]>

=item * F<t/pmc/signal.t>

=back

=head1 Dynloading

=head2 What it is

Nearly all modern operating systems support runtime-specified importation of
shared library object code, and Parrot must support this feature in order to
use native libraries without relying on the system linker.  Notable APIs for
this mechanism include dlopen on common *NIXes and LoadLibrary on Win32.

=head2 How to help

If not already supported, research the dynamic library loading API for your
platform and implement it in the platform-specific sources.  Since Parrot
substantially abstracts the dynload mechanism, adding support for a new
platform should not require diving far into Parrot internals.

=head2 References

=over 4

=item * F<config/gen/platform/*/dl.[ch]>

=back

=head1 Memory protection

=head2 What it is

An ever-increasing number of operating systems support the enforcement of
executable/non-executable flags on memory regions to prevent the improper
execution of erroneous or malicious instructions.  When applied by default to
regions that rarely need to contain executable code, this is a useful security
measure.  However, since Parrot (specifically, the JIT subsystem) generates and
executes native instructions in such regions, it must be able to safely
circumvent these protections.

=head2 How to help

Determine what level of support for execute protection your architecture/OS
combination has, and how to selectively disable it.  Documentation for features
like PaX (Linux) and W^X (OpenBSD) are the best place to look for this
information.  The platform-specific source files implement memory allocation
wrappers that hide these details, so wading deep into Parrot is probably not a
prerequisite for this task.

=head2 References

=over 4

=item * F<config/gen/platform/*/memexec.c>

=back

=cut
