# Copyright (C) 2007-2011, Parrot Foundation.

=head1 NAME

docs/stability.pod -- Parrot Component/Interface Stability Classification

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document classifies Parrot components and interfaces based on their
stability. Stability is a measure of likeliness that a component or interface
will change in a subsequent version. Components include command-line tools,
and documents (eg. PDDs.) Interfaces include API/ABIs, modules, libraries,
environment variables, and implementations (eg. source and headers.)

Stability classifications must be included in component or interface
documentation. For an example, see the L<STABILITY> section of this doc.

=head2 Stability Classifications

There are five categories of stability, as described below:

=over 4

=item Private

This component or interface is only for use within Parrot; it shouldn't be
exposed or used externally.  It may be modified or removed at any time.

=item Unstable

Externally visible, but under active development. Use at your own risk.

=item Experimental

Externally visible, but under development. Changes must include documentation
(and tests where appropriate,) and must be reviewed by the Project Team before
committing to master. Backward compatibility is maintained when possible.

=item Stable

Externally visible and unlikely to change between minor releases. Changes must
include docs and tests, must be reviewed and approved by the Project Team, and
cannot be applied without a deprecation cycle for any affected component or
interface.

=item Deprecated

This component or interface is no longer supported; it will be removed after
the completion of its deprecation cycle (usually one release.) Items that
have been deprecated but not yet removed are documented in the top level
F<api.yaml>.

=back

=head1 TODO

=over 4

=item Determine where and how stability should be documented for each
component/interface

=back

=head1 STABILITY

Experimental. This proposal has been reviewed and accepted by the Project Team,
but some details remain to be filled in.

=head1 AUTHOR

jerry gay a.k.a. particle

=cut
