=head1 Programming Parrot -- PMCs

=head2 Preliminaries

To run the example code in this article, you'll need to
obtain a copy of Parrot and build it for your system. For
information on obtaining Parrot, see
http://www.parrotcode.org/. Instructions for compiling
Parrot are available in the Parrot distribution itself. All
code examples in this article were tested with Parrot 0.4.5

=head2 A quick review of Parrot

As mentioned by Alberto Manuel Simões in TPR 2.3, Parrot is
a register-based virtual machine with 4 register types:
Integer, String, Number, PMC. There are 32 registers for
each register type (0 through 31) and registers are
referenced by a capital letter signifying the register type
followed by the register number (C<S15> is String register
number 15). Parrot programs consist of lines of text where
each line contains one opcode and its arguments.

Utilizing a slightly higher-level syntax called PIR (Parrot
Intermediate Representation) you may obtain an arbitrary
number of each register type by prefixing the register with
a C<$> (For example, the virtual register C<$I51> is
perfectly valid). PIR also provides for a more "natural"
syntax for opcodes. Rather than saying C<set I1, 0> to
assign a zero to the I1 register, you may say instead C<I1 =
0>. PIR also provides syntax for easily creating named
variables and constants, subroutines, passing parameters to
subroutines, accessing parameters by name, etc.

Now, on to business ...

=head2 What's a PMC?

Integers, strings, and arbitrary floating point numbers are
common data types in most programming languages, but what's
a PMC? PMC stands for "Parrot Magic Cookie". PMCs are how
Parrot handles more complicated structures and behaviors
(hence the magic :) Some examples of PMC usage would be for
arrays, hashes, data structures, objects, etc. Anything that
can't be expressed using just integers, floating point
numbers and strings can be expressed with a PMC.

Parrot comes with many types of PMC that encapsulate common,
useful behavior. Here's a program that lists all of the PMC
types that are builtin to Parrot:

=head3 Example 1: list all PMC types

    .sub _ :main
        $I0 = 1                         # The first PMC
      loop:
        $I1 = valid_type $I0            
        unless $I1 goto end_loop        # stop on invalid PMC number
        $S0 = typeof $I0                # get PMC type name
        print $I0                       # output PMC number
        print "\t"
        print $S0                       # output PMC type name
        print "\n"
        inc $I0
        goto loop
      end_loop:
    .end

In this program, the C<typeof> opcode is used to determine
the type of each PMC available to Parrot. When given an
integer argument, C<typeof> will return the name of the PMC
type corresponding to that integer as a string.

Many of the PMC type names give clues as to how they are
used. Here's a table that gives a short description of
several interesting and useful PMC types:

    PMC type        Description of PMC
    --------        ------------------
    Env             access environment variables
    Iterator        iterate over aggregates such as arrays or hashes
    Array           A generic, resizable array
    Hash            A generic, resizable hash
    Random          Obtain a random number
    String          Similar to a string register but in PMC form
    Integer         Similar to an integer register but in PMC form
    Float           Similar to a number register but in PMC form
    Exception       The standard exception mechanism
    Timer           A timer of course :)

=head2 Your wish is my command line

Before I take a closer look at some of these PMC types,
let's look at a common thing that people want to know how to
do-- read command line arguments. The subroutine designated
as the main program (by the C<:main> modifier) has an
implicit parameter passed to it that is the command line
arguments. Since previous examples never had such a
parameter to the main program, Parrot simply ignored
whatever was passed on the command line. Now I want Parrot
to capture the command line so that I can manipulate it. So,
let's write a program that reads the command line arguments
and outputs them one per line:

=head3 Example 2: reading command line arguments, take 1

    .sub _ :main
        .param pmc args
      loop:
        unless args goto end_loop           # line 4
        $S0 = shift args
        print $S0
        print "\n"
        goto loop
      end_loop:
    .end

The C<.param> directive tells parrot that I want this
subroutine to accept a single parameter and that parameter
is some sort of PMC that I've named C<args>. Since this is
the main subroutine of my program (as designated by the
C<:main> modifier to the subroutine), Parrot arranges for
the C<args> PMC to be an aggregate of some sort that
contains the command line arguments. We then repeatedly use
the C<shift> opcode to remove an element from the front of
C<args> and place it into a string register which I then
output. When the C<args> PMC is empty, it will evaluate as a
boolean false and the conditional on line will cause the
program to end.

One problem with my program is that it's destructive to the
C<args> PMC. What if I wanted to use the C<args> PMC later
in the program? One way to do that is to use an integer to
keep an index into the aggregate and then just print out
each indexed value.

=head3 Example 3: reading command line arguments, take 2

    .sub _ :main
        .param pmc args
        .local int argc
        argc = args                         # line 4
        $I0 = 0
      loop:
        unless $I0 < argc goto end_loop
        print $I0
        print "\t"
        $S0 = args[$I0]                     # line 10
        print $S0
        print "\n"
        inc $I0
        goto loop
      end_loop:
    .end

Line 4 shows something interesting about aggregates. Similar
to perl, when you assign an aggregate to an integer thing
(whether it be a register or local variable), Parrot puts
the number of elements in the aggregate into the integer
thing. (e.g., if you had a PMC that held 5 things in C<$P0>,
the statement C<$I0 = $P0> assigns 5 to the register C<$I0>)

Since I know how many things are in the aggregate, I can
make a loop that increments a value until it reaches that
number. Line 10 shows that to index an aggregate, you use
square brackets just like you would in Perl and other
programming languages. Also note that I'm assigning to a
string register and then printing that register. Why didn't
I just do C<print args[$I0]> instead? Because this isn't a
high level language. PIR provides a nicer syntax but it's
still really low level. Each line of PIR still essentially
corresponds to one opcode. So, while there's an opcode to
index into an aggregate and an opcode to print a string,
there is no opcode to do I<both> of those things.

BTW, what type of aggregate is the C<args> PMC anyway?
Another way to use the C<typeof> opcode is to pass it an
actual PMC:

=head3 Example 4: Typing the C<args> PMC

    .sub _ :main
        .param pmc args
        $S0 = typeof args
        print $S0
        print "\n"
    .end

When you run this program it should output
"ResizableStringArray". If you assign the result of the
C<typeof> opcode to a string thing, you get the name of the
PMC type. If you assign the result to an integer thing, you
get the PMC type number.

=head2 "You are standing in a field of PMCs"

Now, let's get back to that table above. The C<Env> PMC can
be thought of as a hash where the keys are environment
variable names and the values are the corresponding
environment variable values. But where does the actual PMC
come from? For the command line, the PMC showed up as an
implicit parameter to the main subroutine. Does C<Env> do
something similar?

Nope. If you want to access environment variables I<you>
need to create a PMC of type C<Env>. This is accomplished by
the C<new> opcode like so: C<$P0 = new .Env> After that
statement, C<$P0> will contain a hash consisting of all of
the environment variables at that time. All built-in types
are prefixed with a dot, so if the PMC type is
C<OrderedHash>, to create a new one you'd do C<$P0 = new
.OrderedHash>.

But, both the keys and values the C<Env> hash are strings,
so how do I iterate over them as I did for the command
line? We can't do the same as I did with the command line
and use an integer index into the PMC because the keys are
strings, not integers. So, how do I do it? The answer is
another PMC type--C<Iterator>

An C<Iterator> PMC is used, as its name implies, to iterate
over aggregates. It doesn't care if they are arrays or
hashes or something else entirely, it just gives you a way
to walk from one end of the aggregate to the other.

Here's a program that outputs the name and value of all
environment variables:

=head3 Example 5: output environment

    .sub _ :main
        .local pmc env, iter
        .local string key, value

        env = new .Env                      # line 3
        iter = new .Iterator, env           # line 4
      iterloop:
        unless iter goto iterend
        key = shift iter                    # line 8
        value = env[key]
        print key
        print ":"
        print value
        print "\n"
        goto iterloop
      iterend:
    .end

Lines 3 and 4 create my new PMCs. Line 3 creates a new
C<Env> PMC which at the moment of its existence contains a
hash of all of the environment variables currently in the
environment. Line 4 creates a new C<Iterator> PMC and
initializes it with the PMC that I wish to iterate over
(my newly created C<Env> PMC in this case). From that point
on, I treat the C<Iterator> much the same way I first
treated the PMC of command line arguments. Test if it's
"empty" (the iterator has been exhausted) and shift elements
from the C<Iterator> in order to walk from one end of the
aggregate to the other. A key difference is however, I'm
not modifying the original aggregate, just the C<Iterator>
which can be thrown away or reset so that I can iterate the
aggregate over and over again or even have two iterators
iterating the same aggregate simultaneously. For more
information on iterators, see
L<parrot/docs/pmc/iterator.pod>

So, to output the environment variables, I use the
C<Iterator> to walk the keys, and then index each key into
the C<Env> PMC to get the value associated with that key and
then output it. Simple. Say ... couldn't I have iterated
over the command line this same way? Sure!

=head3 Example 6: reading command line arguments, take 3

    .sub _ :main
        .param pmc args
        .local pmc cmdline
        cmdline = new .Iterator, args
      loop:
        unless cmdline goto end_loop
        $S0 = shift cmdline
        print $S0
        print "\n"
        goto loop
      end_loop:
    .end

Notice how this code approaches the simplicity of the
original that destructively iterated the C<args> PMC. Using
indexes can quickly become complicated by comparison.

=head2 How do I create my own PMC type?

That's really beyond the scope of this article, but if
you're really interested in doing so, get a copy of the
Parrot source and read the file C<docs/vtables.pod>.
This file outlines the steps you need to take to create
a new PMC type.

=head2 A few more PMC examples

I'll conclude with a few examples without explanation. I
encourage you to explore the Parrot source code and
documentation to find out more about these (and other) PMCs.
A good place to start is the docs directory in the Parrot
distribution (parrot/docs)

=head3 Example 7: Output random numbers

    .sub _ :main
        $P0 = new .Random
        $N0 = $P0
        print $N0
        print "\n"
        $N0 = $P0
        print $N0
        print "\n"
    .end

=head3 Example 8: Triggering an exception

    .sub _ :main
        $P0 = new .Exception
        $P0['_message'] = "The sky is falling!"
        throw $P0
    .end

=head3 Example 9: Setting a timer

    .include "timer.pasm"                   # for the timer constants

    .sub expired
       print "Timer has expired!\n"
    .end

    .sub _ :main
       $P0 = new .Timer
       $P1 = global "expired"

       $P0[.PARROT_TIMER_HANDLER] = $P1    # call sub in $P1 when timer goes off
       $P0[.PARROT_TIMER_SEC] = 2          # trigger every 2 seconds
       $P0[.PARROT_TIMER_REPEAT] = -1      # repeat indefinitely
       $P0[.PARROT_TIMER_RUNNING] = 1      # start timer immediately
       global "timer" = $P0                # keep the timer around

       $I0 = 0
      loop:
       print $I0
       print ": running...\n"
       inc $I0
       sleep 1                             # wait a second
       goto loop
    .end


=head2 Author

Jonathan Scott Duff <duff@pobox.com>

=head2 Thanks

=over 4

* Alberto Simões

=back

=cut
