# Copyright (C) 2008, The Perl Foundation.
# $Id$

=head1 Episode 2: Poking in Compiler Guts

=head2 Introduction

In the first episode, we introduced the Parrot Compiler Tools, and generated a
very simple language using a shell script provided with the Parrot distribution.
We also announced Squaak, a simple programming language developed specially for
this tutorial. Squaak will be the case study to show how PCT can be used as a
very effective set of tools to implement a language for Parrot. A list of
features of Squaak was specified. If you felt lucky, you might even have tried
to do the exercise at the end of the previous episode.

In this episode, we will take a closer look at the generated compiler. We shall
check out the different stages of the compilation process, and show what's going
on in PCT-based compilers.

=head2 Under the Hood

Remember how we invoked our compiler in the previous episode? We can pass a
file, or invoke the compiler without a command line argument, in which case our
compiler enters the interactive mode. Consider the first case, passing the file
test.sq, just as we did before:

 $ ../../parrot squaak.pbc test.sq

When invoking our compiler like this, the file test.sq is compiled and the
generated code (bytecode) is executed immediately by Parrot. How does this work,
you might wonder. The interpretation of a script is done through a series of
transformations, starting at the script source and ending in a format that can
be executed by Parrot. Compilers built with the PCT (based on the HLLCompiler
class) can take a target option, to show one of the intermediate
representations. This option can have the following values, corresponding to the
four default compilation phases of an HLLCompiler object:

=over 4

=item * --target=parse

=item * --target=past

=item * --target=post

=item * --target=pir

=back

This is an example of using the target option set to "parse", which will print
the parse tree of the input to stdout:

 $ ../../parrot squaak.pbc --target=parse test.sq

In interactive mode, giving this input:

 say 42;

will print this parse tree (without the line numbers):

  1 "parse" => PMC 'Squaak::Grammar' => "say 42;\r\n" @ 0 {
  2    <statement> => ResizablePMCArray (size:1) [
  3        PMC 'Squaak::Grammar' => "say 42;\r\n" @ 0 {
  4            <value> => ResizablePMCArray (size:1) [
  5                PMC 'Squaak::Grammar' => "42" @ 4 {
  6                    <integer> => PMC 'Squaak::Grammar' => "42" @ 4
  7                }
  8            ]
  9        }
 10    ]
 11 }

When changing the value of the target option, the output changes into a
different representation of the input. Why don't you try that right now?

So, a HLLCompiler object has four compilation phases: parsing, construction of a
Parrot Abstract Syntax Tree (PAST), construction of a Parrot Opcode Syntax Tree
(POST), generation of Parrot Intermediate Representation (PIR). After
compilation, the generated PIR is executed immediately.

If your compiler needs additional stages, you can add them to your HLLCompiler
object. For Squaak, we will not need this, but for details, check out
F<compilers/pct/src/pct/HLLCompiler.pir>.

We shall now discuss each compilation phase in more detail. The first two
phases, parsing the input and construction of the PAST are executed
simultaneously. Therefore, these are discussed together.

Parse phase: match objects and PAST construction
During the parsing phase, the input is analyzed using Perl 6's extended regular
expressions, known as Rules (see Synopsis 5 for details). When a rule matches
some input string, a so-called Match object is created. A Match object is a
combined array and hashtable, implying it can be indexed by integers as well as
strings. As rules typically consist of other (sub) rules, it is easy to retrieve
a certain part of the match. For instance, this rule:

 rule if_statement {
     'if' <expression> 'then' <statement> 'end'
     {*}
 }

has two other subrules: expression and statement. The match object for the rule
if_statement represents the whole string from if to end. When you're interested
only in the expression or statement part, you can retrieve that by indexing the
match object by the name of the subrule (in this case, expression and statement,
respectively).

During the parse phase, the PAST is constructed. There is a small set of PAST
node types, for instance, C<PAST::Var> to represent variables (identifiers, such
as C<print>), C<PAST::Val> to represent literal values (for instance, C<"hello">
and C<42>), and so on. Later we shall discuss the various PAST nodes in more
detail.

Now, you might wonder, at which point exactly is this PAST construction
happening? This is where the special {*} symbol comes in, just below the string
'if' in the if_statement rule shown above. These special markers indicate that a
parse action should be invoked. Such a parse action is just a method that has
the same name as the rule in which it is written (in this case: if_statement).
So, during the parsing phase, several parse actions are executed, each of which
builds a piece of the total PAST representing the input string. More on this
will be explained later.

The Parrot Abstract Syntax Tree is just a different representation of the same
input string (your program being compiled). It is a convenient data structure to
transform into something different (such as executable Parrot code) but also to
do all sorts of analysis, such as compile-time type checking.

=head2 PAST to POST

After the parse phase during which the PAST is constructed, the HLLCompiler
transforms this PAST into something called a Parrot Opcode Syntax Tree (POST).
The POST representation is also a tree structure, but these nodes are on a lower
abstraction level. For instance, on the PAST level there is a node type to
represent a while statement (constructed as
C<PAST::Op.new( :pasttype('while') )> ).

The template for a while statement typically consists of a number of labels and
jump instructions. On the POST level, the same while statement is represented by
a set of nodes, each representing a one instruction or a label. Therefore, it is
much easier to transform a POST into something executable than when this is done
from the PAST level.
Usually, as a user of the PCT, you don't need to know details of POST nodes,
which is why this will not be discussed in further detail. Use the target option
to see what a POST looks like.

=head2 POST to PIR

In the fourth (and final) stage, the POST is transformed into Parrot
Intermediate Representation (PIR). As mentioned, transforming a POST into
something executable is rather straightforward, as POST nodes already represent
individual instructions and labels. Again, normal usage of the PCT does not
require you to know any details about this transformation.

=head2 And now for the good news...

We established the general data flow of PCT-based compilers, which consists of
four stages:

=over 4

=item 1. source to parse tree

=item 2. parse tree to PAST

=item 3. PAST to POST

=item 4. POST to PIR

=back

where we noted that the first two are done during the parse stage. Now, as
you're reading this tutorial, you're probably interested in using the PCT for
implementing Your Favorite Language for Parrot. We already saw that a language
grammar is expressed in Perl 6 Rules. What about the other transformations?
Well, earlier in this episode we mentioned the term parse actions, and that
these actions create PAST nodes. After you have written a parse action for each
grammar rule, you're done!

Say what?

That's right. Once you have correctly constructed a PAST, your compiler can
generate executable PIR, which means you just implemented your first language
for Parrot. Of course, you still need to implement any language specific
libraries, but that's besides the point.

PCT-based compilers already know how to transform a PAST into a POST, and how to
transform a POST into PIR. These transformation stages are already provided by
the PCT.

=head2 What's next?

In this episode we took a closer look at the internals of a PCT-based compiler.
We discussed the four compilation stages, that transform an input string (a
program, or script, depending on your definition) into a PAST, a POST and
finally executable PIR.
The next episodes is where the Fun Stuff is: we will be implementing Squaak for
Parrot. Piece by piece, we will implement the parser and the parse actions.
Finally, we shall demonstrate John Conway's "Game of Life" running on Parrot,
implemented in Squaak.

=head2 Exercises

Last episode's exercise was to add a command line banner and prompt for the
interactive mode of our compiler. Given the hints that were provided, it was
probably not too hard to find the solution, which is shown below. This
subroutine onload can be found in the file Squaak.pir. The relevant lines are
marked with a comment

  .sub 'onload' :anon :load :init
      load_bytecode 'PCT.pbc'

      $P0 = get_hll_global ['PCT'], 'HLLCompiler'
      $P1 = $P0.'new'()
      $P1.'language'('Squaak')
      $P1.'parsegrammar'('Squaak::Grammar')
      $P1.'parseactions'('Squaak::Grammar::Actions')

      $P1.'commandline_banner'("Squaak for Parrot VM\n") ## set banner
      $P1.'commandline_prompt'('> ')                     ## set prompt

  .end

Starting in the next episode, the exercises will be more interesting. For now,
it would be useful to browse around through the source files of the compiler,
and see if you understand the relation between the grammar rules in grammar.pg
and the methods in actions.pm.
It's also useful to experiment with the --target option described in this
episode. If you don't know PIR, now is the time to do some preparation for that.
There's sufficient information to be found on PIR, see the References section
for details. In the mean time, if you have any suggestions, questions and
whatnot, don't hesitate to leave a comment.

=head2 References

=over 4

=item 1. PIR language specification: docs/pdds/draft/PDD19_pir.pod

=item 2. PIR articles: docs/art/*.pod

=back


=cut

